<!-- image -->

## IFSPT International Perspective

## The Prevention and Treatment of Running Injuries: A State of the Art

Christopher Napier, PT, PhD 1  a , Richard W Willy, PT, PhD 2

1  Department of Physical Therapy, University of British Columbia; Schools of Mechatronic Systems Engineering and Engineering Science, Simon Fraser University,  2  School of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Science, University of Montana

Keywords: footwear, training load, treatment, injury prevention, running https://doi.org/10.26603/001c.25754

## International Journal of Sports Physical Therapy

Vol. 16, Issue 4, 2021

Despite  decades  of  efforts,  running  injury  prevention programs continue to fall short of achieving a reduction in running injury rates 1  and most running injuries are notorious for their high recurrence. 2  Prevention and treatment efforts often focus on a sole factor, such as muscle strengthening  or  biomechanics,  despite  the  multifactorial  nature of running injuries. Additional emphasis on low-value interventions  such  as  footwear  to  prevent  injury  often  detracts from more effective prevention strategies. 3  Not surprisingly, most running injury prevention programs fail to reduce  running  injury  rates  and,  in  the  case  of  advising on running biomechanics, may actually increase the risk of running injury. 1  The purpose of this international perspective  is  to  describe  how  a  causal  framework  approach  can help to prevent and treat running injuries.

Causal  frameworks  provide  an  important  path  forward for running injury prevention and treatment efforts by considering how training loads interact with modifiers (i.e., risk factors). Bertelsen et al 4  introduced a causal framework for the aetiology of running injuries that identified the complex interplay  of  training  load  (i.e.,  number  of  running  steps) with the distribution of  biomechanical  loading  across anatomical structures, magnitude of internal biomechanical loads, and an anatomical structure's capacity to tolerate the  load.  For  instance,  male  masters  runners  have  an  elevated  risk  for  Achilles  tendinopathy  due  in  large  part  to age-related reductions in Achilles tendon stiffness. 5  Rapid increases in hill running or speedwork distribute a greater degree of biomechanical loads on the Achilles tendon, potentially resulting in an injurious training load in the masters  runner.  Importantly,  runners  who  are  not  at-risk  for Achilles tendinopathy, such as adolescent runners, may not experience  the  same  injury  under  similar  training  loads. A  critical  concept  in  Bertelsen's  causal  framework  is  that a  runner's  biomechanics  distributes  the  loads  to  various structures, but an injury will not result without a training load error coupled with a compromised load capacity of the anatomical structure.

More recently, Kalkhoven et al 6  provided an important update to the Bertelsen framework by incorporating the tissue-specific microdamage that occurs from biomechanical loading  and  the  ability  of  the  athlete's  underlying  physiology to support tissue adaptation. The Kalkhoven framework  applies  an  important  concept  long-known  in  tissue mechanics:  cumulative  biomechanical  loads  have  a  nonlinear relationship with cumulative tissue damage. For instance, a 10% increase in tissue stress/strain magnitudes results  in  a  50%  reduction  in  the  number  of  loading  cycles (i.e., steps) before tissue failure. 7  This key, non-linear relationship may explain how a sudden addition of speedwork, for instance, can result in injury even if weekly running volume remains unchanged. 8   Yet,  running  injury  prevention programs often view added training load as a linear issue, focusing more on training volume than loading magnitude.

Since tissue is not an inert structure, consideration of the ability of the athlete's physiology to support tissue adaptation in response to loading is a critical component in understanding running injuries. Important physiological concepts, namely Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (RED-S), have  not  had  enough  focus  in  prevention  and  treatment programs. The treatment of bone stress injuries in runners is  emblematic of the problem of concentrating on an isolated risk factor (e.g., biomechanics) while ignoring other keystone contributors, such as energy availability. If energy availability is insufficient to support bone remodeling, addressing biomechanics or prescribing targeted bone loading exercises will likely have minimal therapeutic effect. 9

Adopting a causal framework can greatly inform injury prevention  and  treatment  efforts  by  tailoring  a  program to  the  runner's  risk  profile  and  recent  training  loads.  Enhancing pre-run load capacity of the athlete via consistent, progressive loading (progressive strengthening, minimizing training spikes), addressing psychological stressors, and optimizing a runner's physiology is the first step. Second, considering the attributes of the individual runner (i.e., masters  male  vs  adolescent  female)  and  the  ability  of  the athlete's physiology to support tissue remodeling will help inform  physiological  interventions  and  training  load  pre-

scription.  Tailoring  training  load  prescription  to  address structure-specific cumulative microdamage should also be specific  to  past  injuries  or  anatomical  structures  that  are more likely to experience injury in specific sub-populations. For example, those recovering from, or at-risk for, Achilles tendinopathy  should  add  speedwork  into  a  training  program  judiciously,  whereas  downhill  running  should  be added in slowly if recovering from, or at-risk for, patellofemoral pain. Wearable technologies can monitor injury-specific training loads (i.e., number of steps) while performing activities known to increase loading on injury-susceptible tissues, helping inform the need for recovery days

<!-- image -->

to  restore  pre-run  load  capacity  and  support  tissue  adaptation. Lastly, clinicians should adopt routine screening for RED-S and other physiological conditions known to reduce tissue adaptability and refer out for specialized care when indicated.

We believe that by employing a causal framework of running injury aetiology that considers current theory in tissue mechanics and physiology, and by following general principles of injury risk management, the puzzle of running injury prevention and treatment has potential to be solved.

Submitted: June 16, 2021 CDT, Accepted: July 14, 2021 CDT

## REFERENCES

1. Fokkema T, de Vos R-J, van Ochten JM, et al. Online multifactorial prevention programme has no effect on the number of running-related injuries: a randomised controlled trial. Br J Sports Med . 2019;53(23):1479.
6. Kalkhoven JT, Watsford ML, Impellizzeri FM. A conceptual model and detailed framework for stressrelated, strain-related, and overuse athletic injury. J Sci Med Sport . 2020;23(8):726-734.
2. Blønd L, Hansen L. Patellofemoral pain syndrome in athletes: A 5.7-year retrospective follow-up study of 250 athletes. Acta Orthop Belg . 1998;64(4):393-400.
3. Napier C, Willy RW. Logical fallacies in the running shoe debate: let the evidence guide prescription. Br J Sports Med . 2018;52(24):1552.
4. Bertelsen ML, Hulme A, Petersen J, et al. A framework for the etiology of running-related injuries. Scand J Med Sci Sport . 2017;27(11):1170-1180.
5. Willy RW, Paquette MR. The Physiology and Biomechanics of the Master Runner. Sports Med Arthrosc Rev . 2019;27(1):15-21.
7. Edwards WB. Modeling Overuse Injuries in Sport as a Mechanical Fatigue Phenomenon. Exerc Sport Sci Rev . 2018;46(4):224-231.
8. Paquette MR, Napier C, Willy RW, Stellingwerff T. Moving Beyond Weekly 'Distance' - Optimizing Training Quantification in Running. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2020;50(10):564-569.
9. Papageorgiou M, Dolan E, Elliott-Sale KJ, Sale C. Reduced energy availability: implications for bone health in physically active populations. Eur J Nutr . 2018;57(3):847-859.