<!-- image -->

Sudden Cardiac Arrest in Basketball and Soccer Stadiums, the Role of Automated External Defibrillators: A Review. For the BELTRAN Study (BaskEtbaLl and soccer sTadiums: Registry on Automatic exterNal defibrillators)

<!-- image -->

Mario D Bassi , 1 Juan M Farina , 2 Jorge Bombau, 3 Mario Fitz Maurice , 4 Guillermo Bortman , 5 Elaine Nuñez , 6 Manlio Márquez , 7 Norberto Bornancini 8  and Adrian Baranchuk 1,9

1. Department of Medicine, Kingston Health Science Centre, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada; 2. Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, AZ, US; 3. Internal Medicine, National University of La Plata, Argentina; 4. Department of Cardiology, Hospital de Agudos Bernardino Rivadavia, Buenos Aires, Argentina; 5. Club Atlético Boca Juniors, Buenos Aires, Argentina;
6. Servicio de Cardiología, Cedimat Centro Cardiovascular, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic; 7. Department of Electrophysiology, Centro Médico ABC (American British Cowdray), Mexico City, Mexico; 8. Department of Cardiology, Hospital General de Agudos 'General Manuel Belgrano', Buenos Aires, Argentina; 9. Division of Cardiology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada

## Abstract

Sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) during sports events has a dramatic impact on stadium-goers and the public and is often associated with poor outcomes unless treated with an automated external defibrillator (AED). Despite this, stadiums vary in AED use. This review aims to identify the risks and incidences of SCA, and the use of AEDs in soccer and basketball stadiums. A narrative review of all relevant papers was conducted. Athletes across all sports face an SCA risk of 1:50,000 athlete-years, with the greatest risk of SCA in young male athletes (1:35,000 person-years) and black male athletes (1:18,000 person-years). Africa and South America have the poorest soccer SCA outcomes at 3% and 4% survival. AED use on-site improves survival greater than defibrillation by emergency services. Many stadiums do not have AEDs implemented into medical plans and the AEDs are often unrecognisable or are obstructed. Therefore, AEDs should be used on-site, use clear signalling, have certified trained personnel, and be incorporated into stadiums' medical plans.

## Keywords

Sudden cardiac arrest, sudden cardiac death, automatic external defibrillator, soccer, basketball, stadium, out-of-hospital cardiac arrest

Disclosure: MFM is the Director of Inadea (National Institute of Arrhythmias). AB has received consulting fees from Abbott and Bayer, and a grant from Medtronic unrelated to this study; and is on the editorial board for Arrhythmia &amp; Electrophysiology Review ; this did not influence peer review. All other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

Received: 5 October 2022 Accepted: 29 November 2022 Citation: Arrhythmia &amp; Electrophysiology Review 2023;12:e03. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15420/aer.2022.30 Correspondence: Adrian Baranchuk, Cardiac Electrophysiology and Pacing, Kingston General Hospital, Queen's University, 76 Stuart St, Kingston, Ontario K7L 2V7, Canada. E: barancha@kgh.kari.net

Open Access: This work is open access under the CC-BY-NC 4.0 License which allows users to copy, redistribute and make derivative works for non-commercial purposes, provided the original work is cited correctly.

Sudden  cardiac  arrest  (SCA)  during  sports  events  is  a  very  rare,  yet commonly  fatal,  complication  among  athletes  and  spectators  globally, severely  impacting  teams,  communities  and  sport.  Although  SCA  in athletes  is  uncommon,  it  accounts  for  most  sudden  deaths  in  this population, and 80% of cases are completely asymptomatic until onset of SCA. 1,2 Regardless of the improved physical fitness of competitive athletes, the incidence of SCA may be greater in athlete populations than in the general population. 3,4 Soccer remains the most popular sport in the world, and basketball is one of the fastest-growing sports globally, yet very little is known about SCA in professional soccer and basketball stadiums. 5,6

Additionally, spectators, who are individuals in the stadium not in the field of play, have been shown to have a higher risk of SCA than the general population outside of the stadium. 3,7 As a result, there is a critical need to focus  on  prompt  SCA  identification  and  immediate  treatment,  in  any professional sports stadium setting.

The most important determinant in SCA survival is time to defibrillation, which  outside  of  a  hospital  can  be  done  via  an  automatic  external defibrillator  (AED). 8 Evidence  has  shown  the  effectiveness  of  rapid defibrillation in stadiums and sports clubs globally. 3,7,9-11 However, many sports stadiums vary in the presence, location and implementation of AED protocols, possibly leading to a poor emergency response. 12,13

Gathering  information  about  this  problem  could  help  to  identify  global solutions to improve AED usage in professional sports stadiums, ultimately leading to improved safety for both athletes and spectators.

Therefore, the objectives of this narrative review are to identify the risk factors  and  global  incidence  of  SCA  in  professional  stadiums,  and  the implementation of AEDs in this sport setting.  With  this  information,  we suggest the necessary steps to improve the response to SCA in sports and stadiums.

Mean

Proportion

Proportion of SCA

No. SCAs (No. SCAs/

Study

AED

Mean

AEDs

Median

No.

Location

Study (year)

Follow-up

Surviving

Patients Surviving

Total Spectators)

Period

Signage

AEDs:people present

Stadium stadiums

Neurologically to Hospital

(Y/N)

(range)

(Y/N)

Capacity

Intact

(Capacity

| None                        | N/A                      | N/A                         | To hospital        | N/A            | To hospital                  |
|-----------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------|--------------------|----------------|------------------------------|
| N/A                         | 62%                      | N/A                         | 45%                | N/A            | N/A                          |
| 100%                        | 77%                      | 100%                        | 84%                | N/A            | 96%                          |
|                             | (2.5/1,000,000)          |                             | (1.7/1,000,000)    | (1/589,000)    | (1/1,000,000)                |
| 2006-2008 1 (1.7/1,000,000) | 80 months (1998-2005) 13 | 2006-2007 4 (3.8/1,000,000) | 2006-2008 22       | 2005-2006 77   | 2008-2010 52                 |
| N/A                         | N/A N/A                  |                             | N/A                | N/A N/A        | 1:3,571 (1.3-3.8:10,000) N/A |
| N/A                         |                          | N/A                         | (1:1,800-29,600)   |                |                              |
|                             |                          | N/A                         | 1:7,576            |                |                              |
| Y                           | (N/A) Y                  | (N/A) Y                     | 36,500 Y           | Y              | N/A Y                        |
| N/A                         | 46,600                   | 17,000                      | (3,600-51,600)     | N/A            |                              |
| 1                           | 1                        | 1                           | The Netherlands 20 | Europe 190     | 15                           |
| Scotland                    | Germany                  | The                         | 3                  | Broad          | Germany                      |
| 11                          |                          | 10                          |                    |                |                              |
| et al. 2001                 | 2005 9                   | al. 2008                    | et al. 2009        | et al. 2010 25 | 2014 7                       |
|                             | al.                      |                             |                    |                |                              |
|                             |                          | et                          | de Sandt           |                | et al.                       |
| Crawford                    | et                       |                             |                    | Borjesson      |                              |
|                             | Luiz                     | Leusveld                    |                    |                |                              |
|                             |                          |                             |                    |                | Luiz                         |
|                             |                          |                             | Van                |                |                              |
|                             |                          | Netherlands                 |                    |                |                              |

AED = automated external defibrillator; SCA = sudden cardiac arrest.

## Methods

## Definition of a Professional Stadium

In this review, we define a professional stadium as a sports stadium or arena used for college-level or professional events. This includes National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) and any equivalent governing body for  college  athletics  involved  in  soccer  and  basketball  internationally. Stadiums  and  facilities  must  have  dedicated  concourse,  stands,  staff, spectators and athletes with regular sporting events.

## Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria

To  be  considered  for  this  review,  studies  had  to  meet  the  following inclusion criteria: discussion of SCA in soccer or basketball stadiums, AED use in soccer or basketball stadiums, AED signage, and AED quantity and planning. Papers were excluded if they discussed internal defibrillators, pacemakers and amateur stadiums.

## References Retrieval

An electronic search was conducted using Google Scholar and PubMed/ MEDLINE databases. Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terminology was used  to  determine  keywords  as  follows:  'AED',  'defibrillation',  'soccer', 'football', 'basketball', 'stadium', 'arena', 'sudden cardiac arrest', 'sudden cardiac  death',  'cardiac  arrest',  'AED  signage',  'arrhythmia',  'fibrillation' and 'asystole'.

Results of the literature search were screened based on title and abstract by  three  investigators  (MDB,  JMF  and  AB)  with  relevant  articles  being retrieved if reviewers agreed on their relevance. Any disagreements were resolved by consensus.

## Results

## Incidence of Sudden Cardiac Arrest in Athletes and Non-athletes

SCA is the leading cause of medical death in athletes, however, there is much variation in SCA incidence reporting globally in athletes. 1,5,6,14,15 One review  reported  an  SCA  incidence  for  athletes  under  35  years  old  of 2:100,000 athlete-years for  college-level  athletes,  with  this  current  rate being four-fivefold greater than previously estimated in 1995 at approximately 0.33/100,000 athlete-years. 16 Other research showed that athletes at all levels of play have an SCA incidence of 0.98/100,000 athleteyears, while athletes between the ages of 14 years and 25 years old have an SCA incidence of 1.91/100,000 athlete-years. 17 A recent study found that the  risk  of  SCA  in  college-aged  male  athletes  is  currently  2.85/100,000 person-years  and  5.55/100,000  person-years  for  black  male  athletes, specifically. 15 For soccer, athletes have an SCA incidence of 1-3/100,000 athletes per year in professional soccer athletes and up to 6.8/100,000 athletes per year in young athletes. 18,19 In basketball, Harmon et al. found the incidence of SCA to be approximately 9.09/100,000 per year. 1

Evidence  is  conflicting  regarding  the  incidence  of  SCA  in  athletes compared with the general population. Although few studies indicate that athletes' incidence rates of SCA are lower than the general population, most studies indicate that athletes have significantly higher rates of SCA than non-athletes, with ratios being as high as 2.5:1 in athletes compared with non-athletes. 4,20-24

In professional stadiums specifically, the incidence of SCA is larger than in the  general  population.  The  spectators'  risk  of  SCA  needs  to  be considered,  in  addition  to  the  already  mentioned  athletes'  risk  and incidence. The adjusted incidence is approximately 0.17/100,000 spectators in Europe ( Table 1 ). 3,7,25 Comparatively, the incidence of SCA for

Table 2: Summary of Global Sudden Cardiac Arrest in Soccer Players

| Region        | Leading Cause of all SCA in Athletes (%)                          |   Survival Rate (%) |   Proportion of All Patients ≤35 Years Old (%) |   Proportion of Cases in Athletes ≤35 Years Old with Underlying Cardiomyopathies (%) |
|---------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Africa        | Other, including trauma (50)                                      |                   3 |                                           80   |                                                                                 10   |
| Asia          | Other, including trauma (35.7) and coronary artery disease (35.7) |                  14 |                                           57.1 |                                                                                 25   |
| Australia     | Coronary artery disease (61.9)                                    |                  49 |                                           40   |                                                                                  0   |
| Europe        | Other, including trauma (21)                                      |                  23 |                                           73.7 |                                                                                 14.3 |
| North America | Coronary artery anomaly (24) and coronary artery disease (24)     |                  52 |                                           73   |                                                                                 22.2 |
| South America | Cardiomyopathy (33)                                               |                   4 |                                           80   |                                                                                 41.7 |

SCA = sudden cardiac arrest. Data from Egger et al. 2022. 26

spectators in Dutch soccer stadiums was nearly fivefold higher than in the general population in the Netherlands, with a stadium-goer incidence of SCA at 0.57/1,000,000 per hour and a general population incidence of 0.11/1,000,000 per hour over the same period. 3

## Risk of Sudden Cardiac Arrest in Stadiums

The majority of SCAs in athletes are caused by structural heart disease, such  as  hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy  (HCM),  bicuspid  aortic  valves, dilated cardiomyopathy and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy,  primarily presenting with VF, pulseless ventricular tachycardia  (VT), asystole and  pulseless  electrical activity. 5,15,16,23,26,27 Recent research has found conflicting evidence stating that most young individuals who die from SCA have a structurally normal heart, however, autopsy reports were unable to be retrieved for 18% of these cases in one study. 16,14 Unique  to  South  America  is  that  the  leading  cause  of  SCA  in young Hispanic athletes under 35 years of age is underlying HCM, while simultaneously  having  the  largest  proportion  of  SCA  cases  in  athletes under 35 years old alongside Africa ( Table 2 ). 26

Elevated physical strain of high-intensity activity may act as a trigger for SCA,  possibly  explaining  why  SCA  primarily  occurs  during  training  or within 1  hour  following  training. 5,6,14,21,28-30 In  fact,  all  cases  of  SCA  from 1999 to 2005 in an intercollegiate cohort occurred during some form of physical activity or training. 31 Physical activity may increase the risk of SCA by increasing adrenergic tone, which may itself trigger a fatal arrhythmia such  as  VF  in  different  clinical  settings  such  as  an  acute  MI,  long  QT syndrome or HCM. 32,33

The subgroups at higher risk for SCA globally include black, male athletes in soccer and basketball, with the risk of SCA being significantly higher in these cohorts compared with female and non-black athletes. 15-17,22,24,29,34-37 In fact, SCA in women participating in competitive or recreational sport activities was 30-fold less prevalent than in men, indicating a significantly reduced risk in female sport participants. 38 Additionally, younger athletes have a greater risk of SCA than athletes at all levels of play. 17

It  is  important  to  highlight  that,  while  athletes  are  at  risk  for  SCA  in stadiums, there is also an elevated risk of SCA in spectators as well. 3,7 Risk factors for them include spectators' demographics, physical and emotional stress, substance abuse and meteorological conditions such as high heat and humidity. 3 Additionally, individuals who experience SCA in stadiums are  significantly  less  likely  to  have  underlying  cardiac  disease  than individuals experiencing SCA outside of stadiums. 39 Moreover, the risk of SCA is more than doubled in the surrounding areas of the home arena during match day. 40 Likewise,  the  incidence  of  SCA  has  been  found  to increase  in  stadiums  when  the  home  team  is  playing  a  'notable  rival' team, possibly caused by emotional stress and substance abuse prior to the match. 11 SCA is not limited to spectators or athletes, however, given that 16.5% of casualties in a Glasgow soccer stadium's survey were from non-spectators, including staff. 11

Therefore,  compared  with  the  general  population,  stadiums  require focused investigation and caution to ensure that this increased incidence and risk of SCA is monitored closely and treated effectively to prevent undesirable consequences.

## Regional Trends of Sudden Cardiac Arrest in Soccer and Basketball

There  are  many  variations  in  the  outcomes  and  aetiologies  of  SCA internationally. In a cohort spanning 4 years in the US, the fatality rate was over 50% for SCA in youth athletes, while the SCA fatality rate for mostly European  youth  athletes  remained  above  96%. 5,35 In  a  large  registry conducted by FIFA between 2014 and 2018, 617 cases of SCA in soccer players were identified from 67 countries. Of these 617 cases, survival was noted in 142, producing a global average survival rate of 23%. 26 North America  and  Australia  had  the  highest  survival  rates,  while  Africa  and South America were found to have the poorest outcomes ( Table 2 ). 26

In the US and Japan, basketball is the sport in which the most cases of SCA occur in college sports, with an annual death rate of 1:11,394 in the US. 5,29,36 There  is  a  considerable  lack  of  information  about  SCA  in basketball in most of Asia, Africa, Europe, Latin America and Australia. 41

## Effect of AED on Sudden Cardiac Arrest Outcomes

It is recommended that AEDs must be implemented in every scenario of SCA. 25,42,43 The survival rate of a patient with SCA decreases by 7-10% per minute until defibrillation is delivered. 12,44,45 Therefore, the most important determinant for survival in shockable SCA is a deliverable shock from a defibrillator within 3-5 minutes after onset of arrest. 45

Many  sports  programmes  and  stadiums  require  prophylactic  cardiac screening to possibly identify an individual with an underlying risk factor or  condition.  However,  the  risk  of  SCA  remains  elevated  in  athletes despite the implementation of cardiac screening due to the presence of false-negative  ECG  screens,  hidden  structural  cardiomyopathies,  ion channel  disorders,  commotio  cordis  and  acute  myocarditis,  among others. 46,47 This  further  supports  the  on-site  placement  of  AEDs  in stadiums.

## Figure 1: Comparison of Modern AED Signage

<!-- image -->

A: International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation guidelines standard AED signage. B: Resuscitation Council UK new AED location sign. C: Resuscitation Council UK new AED information poster. AED = automated external defibrillator; CPR = cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Source: A: Lofgren et al. 2009. 64 B and C. Smith et al. 2017. 67 Reproduced with permission from Elsevier

Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is critical to the survival of patients undergoing SCA. In global registries of SCA in soccer players, prompt CPR increased  the  survival  rate  to  50%  from  the  global  average  of  23%. 26 However, survival is significantly improved when CPR is used in conjunction with an AED compared with CPR alone. 12,26,44,48 There are in fact significantly improved survival outcomes in stadiums because of greater availability and faster response of AEDs in these places than in the local community and emergency medical systems (EMS). 26 In one Swedish cohort from 2011 to 2014, the survival after SCA in stadiums was significantly higher than in the public, with a 30-day survival rate of 55.7% compared with 30.4%. 49 Similar  findings  were  seen  in  France  from  2005  to  2010,  where  the survival  of  SCA  in  stadiums  was  22.8%  while  public  survival  after  SCA outside of stadiums was 8.0%. 39

In athletes, conflicting evidence arises from AED implementation in SCA in stadiums. Historically, college athletes have been found to have poor SCA survival  despite  defibrillation. 50-52 However,  international  registries  and recent data suggest improvements in young athletes facing SCA when treated with an AED, with an increase in survival to up to 85%. 26,53 Data reported  not  from  stadiums  specifically,  showed  that  AEDs  have  been markedly effective at improving survival through bystander implementation in public spaces. Hallstrom et al. showed that training bystanders to use AEDs with CPR compared with CPR alone led to significantly improved survival in SCA without any inappropriate shocks. 54 Furthermore, public AED use combined with CPR in SCA cases in athletes aged 18-35 years led  to  a  survival  greater  than  90%,  according  to  a  recent  prospective cohort study. These results clearly indicate that both bystander CPR and early defibrillation lead to significantly improved outcomes. 55

Beyond survival, the appropriate use of AEDs also improves neurological outcomes. In two European soccer stadiums, on-site defibrillation of SCA resulted in survival with positive neurological outcomes in up to 62% of cases  ( Table  1 ). 3,9 Additionally,  public  AED  use  doubles  neurologically intact  survival  compared  with  AEDs  provided  through  dispatched  EMS largely  due  to  a  reduction  in  time-to-shock  improvement,  which  may suggest that spectator use of AEDs can assist in survival in stadiums. 56

Similarly, in college athletes, AED use by an athletics trainer on site was significantly shorter than relying on EMS, reducing the average time of defibrillation from 5.2 to 1.6 minutes. 31

## Sufficient AED Quantity and Location

Despite the evidence that AED use significantly improves SCA outcomes, many stadiums do not have on-site AEDs. Less than 50% of Canadian university sports programmes reported bringing an AED on-site for field sports. 57 A  broad  investigation  of  the  status  of  professional  soccer stadiums  across  Europe  indicated  that  only  72%  of  stadiums  across Europe did have AEDs present for matches and training sessions, with 74%  reporting  that  there  was  no  advanced  CPR  training  available. 25 However, disparities  exist  between  countries  in  more  recent  individual studies.  For  example,  English  professional  soccer  stadiums  now  have AEDs at all training and match days. 58

Despite this individual study, there is a lack of more recent information for Europe. In a cross-sectional study of 16 sports centres in Italy, 48.4% of stadium  staff  claimed  to  not  know  whether  there  was  an  AED  in  their stadium, 38.1% were unsure where the AED was placed, and nearly 80% admitted to not having any medical training with limited knowledge of AED use. 59 Many stadiums that did not have AEDs on site relied on local EMS or community defibrillation in response to SCA, although the EMS response often took more than 10 minutes to transport the patient to the nearest hospital in 33% of all stadiums. 25

To identify the appropriate location and quantity of AEDs, the American Heart Association recommends an AED no more than 1-1.5 minutes away or approximately 160 m from where a crisis may occur. 60 The minimum number  of  AEDs  for  this  desired  response  can  be  calculated  using  a function of estimated time needed to traverse the longest distance in an arena,  slope  and  possible  worst-case  scenarios. 61 In  addition  to  this calculation,  medical  professionals  can  estimate  the  number  of  AEDs required  for  mass  gatherings  by  using  a  separate  function  of  stairway slope in the stadium, stadium congestion and the time required to cross a horizontal  distance  to  calculate  the  required  number  of  AEDs. 62 This

alternative function considers the time required for a first responder to grab  the  defibrillator,  unpack  it,  and  place  electrodes  on  the  patient, giving a more accurate estimate of the response time.

There are many factors that act as facilitators or barriers that influence AED  implementation.  The  most  significant  predictors  of  college  sport departmental AED ownership are unit cost, donated units,  and  proven medical  benefit,  with  the  most  frequent  predictors  of  AED  ownership being  proven  medical  benefit,  concern  for  liability,  and  affordability. 63 Focusing on these factors will improve the odds of athletic departments and stadiums owning and maintaining AEDs on site.

## AED Signage

Adequate signage for the location of an AED is a critical component of all out-of-hospital SCA response programmes. The most common signage standard is the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (ILCOR) guideline used internationally ( Figure 1A ). 64 However, this often has poor recognition by public bystanders. Travellers from 42 countries were able to correctly identify the ILCOR AED sign only 39% of the time, with other research  showing  a  range  of  recognition  from  29.4%  to  47.9%. 65-67 Furthermore,  26%  of  Dutch  medical  professionals  were  unable  to recognise an AED when pointed directly to one. 68 First  responders are aware of an AED present only in 4.25% of SCAs outside of a hospital. 69 In response to these poor outcomes, the Resuscitation Council of the UK compiled more modern imaging and instruction guidelines for AEDs that 83.5% of the public agreed on ( Figures 1B and 1C ). 67

Adequate signage status varies and may be hard to identify given the critical absence of reliable public data. Currently, most UK public AEDs do not  have  any  signage  at  all,  with  only  2.5%  having  accessory  signage more than 5 metres away to guide first responders to its location. 70 Finally, more than 40% of all public UK AEDs with signage were at least partially obstructed, with more than one-third having no external lighting, making them more difficult to find in darker settings. 70 Although these data do not originate from stadiums, the fact that individuals and healthcare professionals  are  unable  to  adequately  identify  and  retrieve  AEDs  in public due to poor signalling is important to highlight. In a stadium setting, relying  on  fast  responses  is  critical  in  the  SCA  response,  and  both bystanders and the stadium medical staff must be able to quickly find and use the AED, thus highlighting the need for improved signalling that is paralleled in the public setting from these studies.

## Role of the AED in an Emergency Action Plan

One of the most important factors in administering rapid defibrillation is the development  and  implementation  of  an  emergency  action  plan  (EAP), which many stadiums lack given that only 82% of stadiums in England have a  recorded  EAP. 58 Siebert  and  Drezner  recommend  a  7-step  plan  for  a stadium's EAP for directing medical staff in the event of SCA. 42 This plan requires  mandatory  AED  and  CPR  training  for  personnel,  strategic  AED placement and signage specific to the stadium, reliable communication strategies between staff and EMS, immediate AED access, regular review and routine practice, cooperation with an advanced cardiac care facility, and replacement of AEDs after usage with debriefing and reporting. 42 For mass gatherings of &gt;1,000 people, such as in stadiums, it is recommended that AEDs act as the foundation in the EAP for medical care. 71 It is strongly encouraged that the EAP is written down and that AEDs are registered with the local  EMS. 8 All personnel should be trained and certified in cardiovascular  emergency  care,  including  staff,  physiotherapists  and athletics trainers to recognise the signs of SCA in order to quickly implement CPR and an AED. 42,72,73 A local licensed physician is also recommended to act as medical director, who is familiar with local medical resources and triage decisions to assist in improving the SCA response and updating the EAP regularly in response to new data, research and debriefing for the team. 74 However, more than 50% of basketball coaches and staff claim that they have no affiliated medical director or athletics trainer, highlighting an area of possible improvement in these sports and stadiums. 75

## AED Regulation and Laws

Legal  requirements  for  AED  placement  differ  internationally  and  may hinder SCA response. In the US, only 15 states legally require AEDs to be placed on-site in health, fitness and/or athletics facilities. 76 Although all EU member  nations  fall  under  the  European  Medical  Device  Directive ensuring  standardisation  across  medical  devices  used,  such  as  AEDs, there is currently no legal obligation enacted by the EU mandating public AEDs.  Many  countries, however,  have  enacted  national  legislation regarding AED implementation in public spaces, such as France, which requires all public access buildings, including stadiums, to have an AED. 77

Results from the most recent survey across European countries showed that 15 countries have laws allowing citizens to use AEDs without a training licence, while three countries require it. 78 Specifically, Russia alone requires AEDs to be used only by EMS providers, not bystanders, something that has shown poor outcomes in out-of-hospital SCA response globally. 12,56,78

Like Europe, Latin American nations differ in their regulations for AED use in stadiums. Colombia recently decreed AEDs mandatory in places where a  mass  audience  congregates,  such  as  stadiums,  joining  other  Latin American nations such as Puerto Rico, Uruguay, Chile and Argentina. 79 Many Asian nations have regulations, such as Malaysia, which recently mandated that public facilities such as stadiums will require an AED by 2025. 80 Australia  recently  enacted  mandatory AED placement in public spaces, including sports centres and stadiums. 81

Worldwide  legal  variation  across  regions  and  the  lack  of  mandatory placement in public spaces across nations is likely to have worsened the response to SCA. Focusing on reducing this variation, improving access, and allowing bystanders to use AEDs legally may save lives in stadiums.

## Discussion

It is evident that SCA should be a critical focus for athletes and spectators in  stadiums.  Given  that  HCM  and  electrical  disorders  are  the  leading causes of SCA in athletes under 35 years of age internationally, CPR alone may not be an effective mechanism of resuscitation as compared with CPR  with  an  AED. 5,12,15,23,26,27,44,82 Regardless,  it  is  recommended  that athletes and coaches themselves learn basic CPR training given that the majority  of  first  responders  to  SCA  were  players  themselves  on  the pitch. 8,26 Additionally, medical training should be incorporated into routine practices of the EAP. 42,74 Regardless of the risk factors or causes of SCA, it is critical to highlight the exceptionally high fatality rate of SCA in stadiumgoers that requires intervention with AEDs as a mainstay of treatment. worst survival rates globally. 26 Hispanic athletes have  the AED availability. 26

In global trends of SCA, South America and Africa appeared to have the largest proportion of cardiomyopathies such as HCM in athletes under 35 years old, suggesting that South America may particularly benefit from increased Due to poor outcomes, aetiologies and lack of available data,  future  research  should  focus  on  Latin  American  and  African outcomes and AED implementation.

There  is  a  key  lack  of  information  on  the  global  incidences  of  SCA  in basketball outside of the US and Japan. Hence, a focus on investigating

regional differences will enable better planning and adequate implementation  of  necessary  regulations  and  tools  to  combat  SCA, including  possible  registries  to  better  track  SCA  cause,  incidence  and outcome in these regions in sport and in public.

Given  that  many  stadiums  globally  rely  on  local  EMS  for  defibrillation rather  than  the  acquisition  of  on-site  AEDs,  this  often  surpasses  the 3-5-minute target for defibrillation. 12,26 This further suggests that having widespread AED and CPR available for on-site defibrillation will improve outcomes in stadiums. Although overall survival is immensely important and often the primary outcome, quality of life following an SCA is severely affected by diminishments in neurological function that may have been prevented with AED use and is something that should be considered.

More  research  investigating  stadium  SCA  incidence,  survival  and  AED implementation to find the optimal AED:capacity ratio may assist future guidelines and regulations for AED requirements. Focusing on the factors that facilitate AED ownership and AED signalling is critical in improving AED implementation, given that identifying factors that improve ease of access in stadiums will save lives. AED signage must be more consistent with modern standards so that in a highly congested and busy area, such as a full stadium, first responders can retrieve them efficiently.

Our recommendations are in line with multiple reviews and consensus guidelines on how stadiums and athletics programmes should respond to SCA. 8,24,74,75,82 Here, we outline and summarise the risks of SCA in stadiums globally and the need for AED implementation, maintenance and routine practices involving AED use on-site through an EAP.

## Limitations

Limitations include heterogeneous  findings  across multiple results, including incidences and risk factors for SCA and a lack of information regarding  basketball  SCA  aetiologies  and  trends  globally.  Additionally, most of our results originated from North America and Europe, limiting the global implications of our results. Finally, many articles investigating SCA in soccer and basketball stadiums are unclear in follow-up, survival and number of AEDs present, restricting the ability to recommend an optimum number of AEDs from current research alone.

## Conclusion

SCA is a highly fatal occurrence in stadiums. Young, black, male athletes in  soccer  and  basketball  are  at  the  highest  risk  of  SCA  and,  currently, many  settings have  negative outcomes  due  to  poor  defibrillation implementation.  CPR  in  conjunction  with  on-site  AED  use,  continuous training and appropriate signage are a critical part of the EAP of a stadium to  improve  survival,  however,  many  stadiums  worldwide  must  adopt modern standards to appropriately respond to SCA.

## Clinical Perspective

- Stadiums have elevated incidences of sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) for athletes, spectators and staff. Therefore, automatic external defibrillators (AEDs) should be in sufficient quantity and located strategically in response to SCA in the concourse and stands.
- Young, male, black athletes are at the highest risk of SCA in sport. Soccer and basketball are commonly the sports with the highest incidences of SCA. While screening programmes exist for these athletes and sports, many causes could go undetected and thus should not exclude having an AED on-site.
- SCA survival and positive neurological outcomes significantly improve when an AED is applied on site, rather than waiting for emergency medical systems (EMS). Given that many stadiums rely on EMS or local AEDs more than 10 minutes away, stadiums should invest in acquiring, maintaining and training for AED use on-site.
- Adequate visibility and signage improve the ease of use and rapidness of AED application. The use of clearly visible consistent signage, with bright colours, instructions and additional directional signage &gt;5 m away will enable faster delivery of defibrillation.
- Each professional stadium and sports programme should have dedicated medical staff and an emergency action plan prepared to respond to an SCA in the stadium, in which the plan must be practised at least once per year to improve, review and revise the response to SCA.
1. Harmon KG, Asif IM, Klossner D, Drezner JA. Incidence of sudden cardiac death in National Collegiate Athletic Association athletes. Circulation 2011;123:1594-600. https:// doi.org/10.1161/circulationaha.110.004622; PMID: 21464047.

measures, frequency and short-term outcome. Anaesthesist 2014;63:636-42 [in German]. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00101014-2354-3; PMID: 25047159.

2. Maron BJ, Shirani J, Poliac LC, et al. Sudden death in young competitive athletes. Clinical, demographic, and pathological profiles. JAMA 1996;276:199-204. https://doi. org/10.1001/jama.1996.03540030033028; PMID: 8667563.
3. van de Sandt F, Umans V. Acute cardiac events and deployment of emergency medical teams and automated external defibrillators in large football stadiums in the Netherlands. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil 2009;16:571-5. https://doi.org/10.1097/HJR.0b013e32832d1927; PMID: 19738475.
4. Corrado D, Basso C, Rizzoli G, et al. Does sports activity enhance the risk of sudden death in adolescents and young adults? J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;42:1959-63. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jacc.2003.03.002; PMID: 14662259.
5. Peterson DF, Kucera K, Thomas LC, et al. Aetiology and incidence of sudden cardiac arrest and death in young competitive athletes in the USA: a 4-year prospective study. Br J Sports Med 2021;55:1196-203. https://doi.org/10.1136/ bjsports-2020-102666; PMID: 33184114.
6. Harmon KG, Asif IM, Maleszewski JJ, et al. Incidence and etiology of sudden cardiac arrest and death in high school athletes in the United States. Mayo Clin Proc 2016;91:1493502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.07.021; PMID: 27692971.
7. Luiz T, Preisegger T, Rombach D, Madler C. Cardiac arrest in spectators in German football stadiums. Precautionary

PMID: 24255911.

8. Drezner JA. Preparing for sudden cardiac arrest - the essential role of automated external defibrillators in athletic medicine: a critical review. Br J Sports Med 2009;43:702-7. https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2008.054890; PMID: 19734506.
9. Luiz T, Kumpch M, Metzger M, Madler C. Management of cardiac arrest in a German soccer stadium. Structural, process and outcome quality. Anaesthesist 2005;54:914-22 [in German]. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00101-005-0889-z; PMID: 16021391.
10. Leusveld E, Kleijn S, Umans VA. Usefulness of emergency medical teams in sport stadiums. Am J Cardiol 2008;101:7124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2007.10.040; PMID: 18308027.
11. Crawford M, Donnelly J, Gordon J, et al. An analysis of consultations with the crowd doctors at Glasgow Celtic football club, season 1999-2000. Br J Sports Med 2001;35:245-9. https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.35.4.245; PMID: 11477019.
12. Kiguchi T, Okubo M, Nishiyama C, et al. Out-of-hospital cardiac arrest across the world: first report from the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (ILCOR). Resuscitation 2020;152:39-49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. resuscitation.2020.02.044; PMID: 32272235.
13. Cronin O, Jordan J, Quigley F, Molloy MG. Prepared for sudden cardiac arrest? A cross-sectional study of automated external defibrillators in amateur sport. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:1171-4. https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2013-092919;
14. Harmon KG, Drezner JA, Maleszewski JJ, et al. Pathogeneses of sudden cardiac death in national collegiate athletic association athletes. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 2014;7:198-204. https://doi.org/10.1161/ CIRCEP.113.001376; PMID: 24585715.
15. Harmon KG. Incidence and causes of sudden cardiac death in athletes. Clin Sports Med 2022;41:369-88. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.csm.2022.02.002; PMID: 35710267.
16. Asif IM, Harmon KG. Incidence and etiology of sudden cardiac death: new updates for athletic departments. Sports Health 2017;9:268-79. https://doi. org/10.1177/1941738117694153; PMID: 28452637.
17. Lear A, Patel N, Mullen C, et al. Incidence of sudden cardiac arrest and death in young athletes and military members: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Athl Train 2022;57:431-43. https://doi.org/10.4085/1062-60500748.20; PMID: 34038947.
18. Santos-Lozano A, Martin-Hernandez J, Baladron C, et al. Sudden cardiac death in professional soccer players. J Am Coll Cardiol 2017;70:1420-1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jacc.2017.07.738; PMID: 28882241.
19. Harmon KG, Drezner JA, Wilson MG, Sharma S. Incidence of sudden cardiac death in athletes: a state-of-the-art review. Heart 2014;100:1227-34. https://doi.org/10.1136/ heartjnl-2014-093872.rep; PMID: 25049314.
20.  Holst AG, Winkel BG, Theilade J, et al. Incidence and etiology of sports-related sudden cardiac death in Denmark: implications for preparticipation screening. Heart Rhythm 2010;7:1365-71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2010.05.021;

- PMID: 20580680.
21. Corrado D, Basso C, Pavei A, et al. Trends in sudden cardiovascular death in young competitive athletes after implementation of a preparticipation screening program. JAMA 2006;296:1593-601. https://doi.org/10.1001/ jama.296.13.1593; PMID: 17018804.
22.  Higgins JP, Ananaba IE, Higgins CL. Sudden cardiac death in young athletes: preparticipation screening for underlying cardiovascular abnormalities and approaches to prevention. Phys Sportsmed 2013;41:81-93. https://doi.org/10.3810/ psm.2013.02.2002; PMID: 23445863.
23.  Marijon E, Tafflet M, Celermajer DS, et al. Sports-related sudden death in the general population. Circulation 2011;124:672-81. https://doi.org/10.1161/ CIRCULATIONAHA.110.008979; PMID: 21788587.
24.  Bille K, Figueiras D, Schamasch P, et al. Sudden cardiac death in athletes: the Lausanne recommendations. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil 2006;13:859-75. https://doi. org/10.1097/01.hjr.0000238397.50341.4a; PMID: 17143117.
25.  Borjesson M, Dugmore D, Mellwig KP, et al. Time for action regarding cardiovascular emergency care at sports arenas: a lesson from the Arena study. Eur Heart J 2010;31:1438-41. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehq006; PMID: 20197422.
26.  Egger F, Scharhag J, Kastner A, et al. FIFA Sudden Death Registry (FIFA-SDR): a prospective, observational study of sudden death in worldwide football from 2014 to 2018. Br J Sports Med 2022;56:80-7. https://doi.org/10.1136/ bjsports-2020-102368; PMID: 33361135.
27. Eisenberg MS, Mengert TJ. Cardiac resuscitation. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1304-13. https://doi.org/10.1056/ NEJM200104263441707; PMID: 11320390.
28.  Isin A, Turgut A, Peden AE. Epidemiology of football-related sudden cardiac death in Turkey. Medicina (Kaunas) 2021;57:1105. https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina57101105; PMID: 34684142.
29.  Hosokawa Y, Murata Y, Stearns RL, et al. Epidemiology of sudden death in organized school sports in Japan. Inj Epidemiol 2021;8:27. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40621-02100326-w; PMID: 34247655.
30.  Peterson DF, Siebert DM, Kucera KL, et al. Etiology of sudden cardiac arrest and death in US competitive athletes: a 2-year prospective surveillance study. Clin J Sport Med 2020;30:305-14. https://doi.org/10.1097/ JSM.0000000000000598; PMID: 32639440.
31. Drezner JA, Rogers KJ. Sudden cardiac arrest in intercollegiate athletes: detailed analysis and outcomes of resuscitation in nine cases. Heart Rhythm 2006;3:755-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2006.03.023; PMID: 16818200.
32.  Marijon E, Uy-Evanado A, Reinier K, et al. Sudden cardiac arrest during sports activity in middle age. Circulation 2015;131:1384-91. https://doi.org/10.1161/ CIRCULATIONAHA.114.011988; PMID: 25847988.
33.  Bunch TJ, Hohnloser SH, Gersh BJ. Mechanisms of sudden cardiac death in myocardial infarction survivors: insights from the randomized trials of implantable cardioverterdefibrillators. Circulation 2007;115:2451-7. https://doi. org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.683235; PMID: 17485594.
34.  Narayanan K, Bougouin W, Sharifzadehgan A, et al. Sudden cardiac death during sports activities in the general population. Card Electrophysiol Clin 2017;9:559-67. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.ccep.2017.07.007; PMID: 29173402.
35.  Davogustto G, Higgins J. Sudden cardiac death in the soccer field: a retrospective study in young soccer players from 2000 to 2013. Phys Sportsmed 2014;42:20-9. https:// doi.org/10.3810/psm.2014.11.2088; PMID: 25419885.
36.  Suzuki-Yamanaka M, Ayusawa M, Hosokawa Y, et al. Epidemiology of sudden cardiac death and sudden cardiac arrest with resultant disability during high school organized sport in Japan. J Sci Med Sport 2022;25:705-9. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jsams.2022.06.011; PMID: 35934658.
37. Marijon E, Bougouin W, Perier MC, et al. Incidence of sportsrelated sudden death in France by specific sports and sex. JAMA 2013;310:642-3. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2013.8711; PMID: 23942684.
38.  Marijon E, Bougouin W, Celermajer DS, et al. Characteristics and outcomes of sudden cardiac arrest during sports in women. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 2013;6:1185-91. https:// doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.113.000651; PMID: 24190898.
39.  Marijon E, Bougouin W, Karam N, et al. Survival from sportsrelated sudden cardiac arrest: in sports facilities versus outside of sports facilities. Am Heart J 2015;170:339-345. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ahj.2015.03.022; PMID: 26299232.
40.  Wilbert-Lampen U, Leistner D, Greven S, et al. Cardiovascular events during World Cup soccer. N Engl J Med 2008;358:475-83. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0707427; PMID: 18234752.
41. D'Ascenzi F, Valentini F, Pistoresi S, et al. Causes of sudden cardiac death in young athletes and non-athletes: systematic review and meta-analysis: sudden cardiac death
- in the young. Trends Cardiovasc Med 2022;32:299-308. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcm.2021.06.001; PMID: 34166791.
42.  Siebert DM, Drezner JA. Sudden cardiac arrest on the field of play: turning tragedy into a survivable event. Neth Heart J 2018;26:115-9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12471-018-1084-6; PMID: 29411289.
43.  Dvorak J, Kramer EB, Schmied CM, et al. The FIFA medical emergency bag and FIFA 11 steps to prevent sudden cardiac death: setting a global standard and promoting consistent football field emergency care. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:1199202. https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2013-092767; PMID: 23940271.
44.  Sanna T, La Torre G, de Waure C, et al. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation alone vs. cardiopulmonary resuscitation plus automated external defibrillator use by non-healthcare professionals: a meta-analysis on 1583 cases of out-ofhospital cardiac arrest. Resuscitation 2008;76:226-32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resuscitation.2007.08.001; PMID: 17875357.
45.  Guidelines 2000 for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Part 6: advanced cardiovascular life support: section 4: devices to assist circulation. The American Heart Association in collaboration with the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation. Circulation 2000;102(8 Suppl):I105-11. PMID: 10966668.
46.  Maron BJ. Sudden death in young athletes. N Engl J Med 2003;349:1064-75. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra022783; PMID: 12968091.
47. Sen-Chowdhry S, McKenna WJ. Sudden cardiac death in the young: a strategy for prevention by targeted evaluation. Cardiology 2006;105:196-206. https://doi. org/10.1159/000091640; PMID: 16498243.
48.  Karam N, Pechmajou L, Narayanan K, et al. Evolution of incidence, management, and outcomes over time in sportsrelated sudden cardiac arrest. J Am Coll Cardiol 2022;79:238-46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2021.11.011; PMID: 35057909.
49.  Frisk Torell M, Strömsöe A, Herlitz J, et al. Outcome of exercise-related out-of-hospital cardiac arrest is dependent on location: sports arenas vs outside of arenas. PLOS One 2019;14:e0211723. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0211723; PMID: 30707745.
50.  Coris EE, Miller E, Sahebzamani F. Sudden cardiac death in division I collegiate athletics: analysis of automated external defibrillator utilization in National Collegiate Athletic Association division I athletic programs. Clin J Sport Med 2005;15:87-91. https://doi.org/10.1097/01. jsm.0000152715.12721.fa; PMID: 15782052.

51.

- Drezner JA, Rogers KJ, Horneff JG. Automated external defibrillator use at NCAA Division II and III universities. Br J Sports Med 2011;45:1174-8. https://doi.org/10.1136/ bjsm.2009.070052; PMID: 21081638.
52.  Drezner JA, Rogers KJ, Zimmer RR, Sennett BJ. Use of automated external defibrillators at NCAA Division I universities. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2005;37:1487-92. https:// doi.org/10.1249/01.mss.0000177591.30968.d4; PMID: 16177599.
53.  Drezner JA, Toresdahl BG, Rao AL, et al. Outcomes from sudden cardiac arrest in US high schools: a 2-year prospective study from the National Registry for AED Use in Sports. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:1179-83. https://doi. org/10.1136/bjsports-2013-092786; PMID: 24124037.
54.  Hallstrom AP, Ornato JP, Weisfeldt M, et al. Public-access defibrillation and survival after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med 2004;351:637-46. https://doi.org/10.1056/ NEJMoa040566; PMID: 15306665.
55.  Bohm P, Meyer T, Narayanan K, et al. Sports-related sudden cardiac arrest in young adults. Europace 2022. https://doi. org/10.1093/europace/euac172; PMID: 36256586; epub ahead of press.
56.  Berdowski J, Blom MT, Bardai A, et al. Impact of onsite or dispatched automated external defibrillator use on survival after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Circulation 2011;124:2225-32. https://doi.org/10.1161/ CIRCULATIONAHA.110.015545; PMID: 22007075.
57. Reagan J, Moulson N, Velghe J, et al. Automated external defibrillator and emergency action plan preparedness amongst Canadian university athletics. Can J Cardiol 2019;35:92-5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjca.2018.10.012; PMID: 30595187.
58.  Malhotra A, Dhutia H, Gati S, et al. Emergency response facilities including primary and secondary prevention strategies across 79 professional football clubs in England. Br J Sports Med 2019;53:813-7. https://doi.org/10.1136/ bjsports-2016-097440; PMID: 28615216.
59.  Lupo R, Giordano G, Artioli G, et al. The use of an automatic defibrillator by non-sanitary personnel in sport areas: an observational study. Acta Biomed 2020;91:79-84. https://doi. org/10.23750/abm.v91i6-S.9484; PMID: 32573509.
60.  Aufderheide T, Hazinski MF, Nichol G, et al. Community lay rescuer automated external defibrillation programs: key state legislative components and implementation strategies: a summary of a decade of experience for healthcare providers, policymakers, legislators, employers, and community leaders from the American Heart Association Emergency Cardiovascular Care Committee, Council on Clinical Cardiology, and Office of State Advocacy. Circulation 2006;113:1260-70. https://doi.org/10.1161/ CIRCULATIONAHA.106.172289; PMID: 16415375.
61. Motyka TM, Winslow JE, Newton K, Brice JH. Method for determining automatic external defibrillator need at mass gatherings. Resuscitation 2005;65:309-14. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.resuscitation.2004.09.016; PMID: 15919567.
62.  Crocco TJ, Sayre MR, Liu T, et al. Mathematical determination of external defibrillators needed at mass gatherings. Prehosp Emerg Care 2004;8:292-7. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.prehos.2003.12.010; PMID: 15295730.
63.  Coris EE, Sahebzamani F, Walz S, Ramirez AM. Automated external defibrillators in National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I athletics. Am J Sports Med 2004;32:744-54. https://doi.org/10.1177/0363546503261694; PMID: 15090393.
64.  Lofgren B, Grove EL, Krarup NH. International sign for automated external defibrillator. Ann Emerg Med 2009;54:855-6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. annemergmed.2009.07.026; PMID: 19942073.
65.  Aagaard R, Grove EL, Mikkelsen R, et al. Limited public ability to recognise and understand the universal sign for automated external defibrillators. Heart 2016;102:770-4. https://doi.org/10.1136/heartjnl-2015-308700; PMID: 26822425.
66.  Maes F, Marchandise S, Boileau L, et al. Evaluation of a new semiautomated external defibrillator technology: a live cases video recording study. Emerg Med J 2015;32:481-5. https://doi.org/10.1136/emermed-2013-202962; PMID: 25082717.
67. Smith CM, Colquhoun MC, Samuels M, et al. New signs to encourage the use of automated external defibrillators by the lay public. Resuscitation 2017;114:100-5. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.resuscitation.2017.03.012; PMID: 28323083.
68.  Schober P, van Dehn FB, Bierens JJ, et al. Public access defibrillation: time to access the public. Ann Emerg Med 2011;58:240-7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. annemergmed.2010.12.016; PMID: 21295376.
69.  Deakin CD, Shewry E, Gray HH. Public access defibrillation remains out of reach for most victims of out-of-hospital sudden cardiac arrest. Heart 2014;100:619-23. https://doi. org/10.1136/heartjnl-2013-305030; PMID: 24553390.
70.  Sidebottom DB, Potter R, Newitt LK, et al. Saving lives with public access defibrillation: a deadly game of hide and seek. Resuscitation 2018;128:93-6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. resuscitation.2018.04.006; PMID: 29654802.
71. Jaslow D, Yancy A, 2nd, Milsten A. Mass gathering medical care. National association of EMS physicians standards and clinical practice committee. Prehosp Emerg Care 2000;4:35960. https://doi.org/10.1080/10903120090941119; PMID: 11045418.
72.  Kramer EB, Botha M, Drezner J, et al. Practical management of sudden cardiac arrest on the football field. Br J Sports Med 2012;46:1094-6. https://doi.org/10.1136/ bjsports-2012-091376; PMID: 22864010.
73.  Nolan JP, Soar J, Zideman DA, et al. European Resuscitation Council guidelines for resuscitation 2010 Section 1. Executive summary. Resuscitation 2010;81:1219-76. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.resuscitation.2010.08.021; PMID: 20956052.
74.  Borjesson M, Serratosa L, Carre F, et al. Consensus document regarding cardiovascular safety at sports arenas: position stand from the European Association of Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation (EACPR), section of Sports Cardiology. Eur Heart J 2011;32:2119-24. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehr178; PMID: 21672932.
75.  Mason Z, Watson AM, Drezner JA. Emergency preparedness for sudden cardiac arrest in amateur athletic union basketball teams: an opportunity to improve outcomes in higher risk athletes. Clin J Sport Med 2022;32:617-9. https:// doi.org/10.1097/JSM.0000000000001062; PMID: 35995597.
76.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Public access defibrillation (PAD) state law fact sheet. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/dhdsp/policy\_resources/ pad\_slfs.htm (accessed 20 September 2022).
77. European Emergency Number Association. AED legislation. Brussels: EENA, 2019. https://eena.org/knowledge-hub/ documents (accessed 21 September 2022).
78.  Baldi E, Grieco NB, Ristagno G, et al. The automated external defibrillator: heterogeneity of legislation, mapping and use across Europe. New insights from the ENSURE study. J Clin Med 2021;10:5018. https://doi.org/10.3390/

jcm10215018; PMID: 34768537.

79.  American Heart Association. Highlighting AED legislation in Latin America during CPR month. 2021. https://www.heart. org/en/about-us/international-programs/international-heartand-stroke-news/highlighting-aed-legislation-in-latinamerica-during-cpr-month (accessed 20 September 2022).
80.  Bernama. Mandatory to install AED at public facilities by
3. 2025 - Khairy. Bernama 25 March 2022. https://www. thesundaily.my/local/mandatory-to-install-aed-at-publicfacilities-by-2025-khairy-updated-KF8997158  (accessed 21 September 2022).
81. Government of South Australia. Automated external defibrillators (public access) act 2020. 2020. https://www. legislation.sa.gov.au/lz?path=/b/archive/automated%20

external%20defibrillators%20(public%20access)%20bill%20 2020\_hon%20frank%20pangallo%20mlc (accessed 27 September 2022).

82.  Carrington M, Providencia R, Chahal CAA, et al. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation and defibrillator use in sports. Front Cardiovasc Med 2022;9:819609. https://doi. org/10.3389/fcvm.2022.819609; PMID: 35242826.