To cite: Ekstrand J, Ueblacker P , Van Zoest W, et al .  Risk factors for hamstring muscle injury in male elite football: medical expert experience and conclusions from 15 European Champions League clubs. BMJ Open Sport &amp; Exercise Medicine 2023; 9 :e001461. doi:10.1136/ bmjsem-2022-001461

Accepted 29 December 2022

<!-- image -->

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-  use permitted under CC BY-  NC. No commercial re-  use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

1 Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Sciences, Linköping University, Linkoping, Sweden 2 Football Club FC Bayern Munich, Munich, Germany 3 PSV Eindhoven, Eindhoven, The Netherlands

4 Department of Sports and Orthopaedic Surgery, Anna Hospital, Eindhoven, The Netherlands

5 Football Coach Evolution, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 6 Football Club Brugge, Brugge, Belgium

7 Department of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, AZ Delta Hospitals, Brugge, Belgium 8 AFC Ajax, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

9 Football Research Group, Linköping, Sweden

## Correspondence to

Dr Jan Ekstrand; jan.  ekstrand@  telia.  com

<!-- image -->

## Risk factors for hamstring muscle injury in male elite football: medical expert experience and conclusions from 15 European Champions League clubs

<!-- image -->

Jan Ekstrand , 1 Peter Ueblacker, 2 Wart Van Zoest, 3,4 Raymond Verheijen, 5 Bruno Vanhecke, 6,7 Maikel van Wijk, 8 Håkan Bengtsson 1,9

## ABSTRACT

Objectives To describe the perceived importance of suggested hamstring injury risk factors according to chief medical officers (CMOs) of European male professional football clubs. A secondary objective was to compare if these perceptions differed between teams with a lowerthan-  average hamstring injury burden and teams with a higher than average hamstring injury burden.

Methods First, CMOs of 15 European professional male football clubs were asked to suggest risk factors for hamstring injury in their club. The perceived importance of the suggested risk factors was then rated by all participants on a 5-  graded Likert scale. Participating teams were divided in two groups depending on their hamstring injury burden during the 2019/2020 and 2020/2021 seasons. The LOW group consisted of seven teams that had a lower than average hamstring injury burden. The HIGH group consisted of eight teams that had a higherthan-  average hamstring injury burden.

Results Twenty-  one risk factors were suggested. The majority were extrinsic in nature, associated with coaching staff, team or club rather than players themselves. 'Lack of communication between medical staff and coaching staff' had the highest average importance (weighted average=3.7) followed by 'Lack of regular exposure to high-  speed football during training sessions' (weighted average=3.6). The HIGH group perceived the player factors fatigue and wellness as more important than the LOW group.

Conclusion According to CMOs recruited in this study, most risk factors for hamstring injuries are extrinsic and associated with the club and coaching staff, and not the players themselves.

## INTRODUCTION

In  1999,  the  Union  of  European  Football Associations initiated a research project aimed  at  reducing  injuries  and  increasing player  safety  in  male  professional  footballthe  Elite  Club  Injury  Study  (ECIS). 1-5 We have previously reported that hamstring injuries  constitute  19%  of  all  time-  loss  injuries, that  is,  about  eight  hamstring  injuries  each season in a typical 25-  player squad. 6 Further,

## WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC

- ⇒ Hamstring injury is the most common injury diagnosis in professional football.
- ⇒ While  programmes  to  prevent  hamstring  injuries have been shown to be effective, no reduction in the rate of hamstring injuries has been observed in male professional football.

## WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS

- ⇒ Several  risk  factors  may  contribute  to  hamstring injuries
- ⇒ According to the chief medical officer's, the majority of  these  are  extrinsic  (ie,  associated  with  the  club and coaching staff) rather than intrinsic (associated with the players themselves).
- ⇒ Most  of  the  risk  factors  proposed  are  associated with factors controlled by coaches such as excessive  training,  too  many  matches  and  overloading with subsequent increases in fatigue or poor training leading to undertraining and muscular dysfunction.

## HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH, PRACTICE OR POLICY

- ⇒ This  study  highlights  the  responsibility  of  the  club and coaching staff in reducing the risk for hamstring injury in professional football. A better understanding  of  the  importance  of  communication  between medical and coaching staff, as well as improvement in  load  management  and  training  content  during the  football  season  could  potentially  lead  to  a  fall in the rate of hamstring injuries among professional players.

hamstring injury is reported to be the most common recurrent injury in football. 7

Between seasons 2001/2002 and 2013/2014, the  rate  of  match-  related  hamstring  injuries was stable whereas the rate of training-  related hamstring injuries increased by an average of 4% each year. 8 During the recent eight seasons (2014/2015-2021/2022), the incidence and burden of hamstring injuries during training and match play have increased significantly, 6 and the proportion of injuries diagnosed as

<!-- image -->

hamstring injuries increased from 12% in 2001/2002 to 24% in 2021/2022. 6

Various  risk  factors  for  hamstring  injuries  have  been proposed, 9-14 and clubs have embraced systematic hamstring  prevention  programmes  to  greater  or  lesser degrees. 15

The aim of this study was to assess the educated opinions and current knowledge on preventable risk factors for  hamstring  injuries  based  on  information  from  15 chief  medical  officers  (CMOs)  at  European  male  elite clubs.  A  second  aim  was  to  compare  the  opinion  of risk factors between teams that had lower than average hamstring injury rates with teams that had higher than average hamstring injury rates during seasons 2019/2020 and 2020/2021.

## MATERIAL AND METHODS Study design

This was an observational cohort study with prospectively collected injury data and retrospectively collected questionnaire in clubs participating in the ECIS.

## Study participants

A total of 17 clubs participated in ECIS and qualified for the initial stage of either the UCL or Europa League in both 2019/2020 and 2019/2020 seasons. These 17 teams delivered  complete  injury  data  for  both  seasons.  Two of  the  invited  teams  did  not  answer  the  questionnaires and were excluded. The remaining 15 teams came from 9 countries (3 teams from England, 3 from Germany, 2 from  the  Netherlands,  2  from  Spain  and  1  each  from Portugal, Russia, Belgium, Italy and Hungary).

## Exposure and injury data collection

Exposure and injury data collection for seasons 2019/2020 and 2020/2021 was completed in September 2021.  Definitions  and  method  of  data  collection  have been described in detail previously. 16-18

The 15 teams were divided into two groups; one group with 7 teams having lower than the mean of all teams for hamstring injury burden (group LOW) and one group with 8 teams (group HIGH) with higher than the mean of hamstring injuries during the two seasons.

Table 1 shows the hamstring injury data for all the 15 clubs as well as the teams in the two groups.

Injury was defined as 'Any physical complaint sustained by  a  player  resulting  from  a  football  match  or  football training,  that  leads  to  the  player  being  unable  to  fully take part in football training or match play thereafter'. A hamstring injury was defined as 'A traumatic distraction or gradual onset injury to the hamstring muscle group'. Injury burden was defined as 'number of lay-  off days per 1000  player  hours  (( Σ lay-  off  days/ Σ exposure  hours) ×  1000)'.  Injury  incidence  was  defined  as  'number  of injuries per 1 000 player hours (( Σ injuries/ Σ exposure hours) × 1000)'.

## The survey questionnaire

The CMOs were informed that the aim of the questionnaire was to assemble and evaluate their expert opinions and conclusions on preventable risk factors for hamstring injury in male elite football. The medical officers were asked to base their responses on their practice and experience  during  the  two  preceding  seasons  2019/2020 and  2020/2021.  After  agreeing  to  participate  in  the study,  they  were  provided  access  to  the  questionnaire using the online survey software SurveyMonkey (SurveyMonkey, California, USA). The survey was conducted in two stages. The first stage consisted of an open question asking  the  medical  officers  to  share  their  opinions  on what they believed could be preventable risk factors for hamstring injury. Their answers revealed 21 potentially preventable  risk  factors  (table  2).  In  the  second  stage, the officers were asked to evaluate perceived importance of each of these 21 risk factors using a 5-  graded Likert

Table 1 Hamstring injury data of clubs with lower-  than-  average hamstring injury (HI) rate (group LOW, n=7), clubs with average or higher than average hamstring injury rates (group HIGH, n=8), and the average for the total group (n=15)

|                                                                 |   Group LOW teams with lower than average HI rates (n=7) |   Group HIGH teams with higher than average HI rates (n=8) |   All teams (N=15) |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| Hamstring injury burden season 2019/2020                        |                                                     12   |                                                       30   |               21   |
| Hamstring injury burden season 2020/2021                        |                                                     13   |                                                       35   |               25   |
| Average hamstring injury burden per season                      |                                                     12   |                                                       32   |               23   |
| Incidence hamstring injury during match play season 2019/2020   |                                                      3   |                                                        5.9 |                4.5 |
| Incidence hamstring injury during match play season 2020/2021   |                                                      2.9 |                                                        5.1 |                4.1 |
| Average incidence hamstring injury during match play per season |                                                      2.9 |                                                        5.4 |                4.3 |
| No of days absent due to hamstring injuries season 2019/2020    |                                                     79   |                                                      187   |              136   |
| No of days absent due to hamstring injuries season 2020/2021    |                                                     75   |                                                      167   |              124   |
| Average no of days absent due to hamstring injuries per season  |                                                     77   |                                                      177   |              130   |

Table 2 Perceived modifiable risk factors for hamstring injuries, divided between intrinsic factors (players) and extrinsic factors (coaching, team, club)

|                                                                                 | Total group (n=15) Weighted average   | Group LOW (n=7) Weighted average   | Group HIGH (n=8) Weighted average   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| Intrinsic risk factors (players)                                                |                                       |                                    |                                     |
| Residual weakness after previous hamstring injury                               | 3.5                                   | 3.6                                | 3.5                                 |
| Strength asymmetry of hamstrings (R/L ratio, Q/H ratio)                         | 3.3                                   | 3.4                                | 3.1                                 |
| Lack of eccentric strength of the hamstrings                                    | 3.2                                   | 3.3                                | 3.1                                 |
| Fatigue                                                                         | 3.1                                   | 2.6                                | 3.6                                 |
| Poor core stability (lumbopelvic control)                                       | 3.1                                   | 2.9                                | 3.3                                 |
| Poor coordination                                                               | 2.8                                   | 2.9                                | 2.8                                 |
| Player wellness (sleep patterns, relationships, etc)                            | 2.5                                   | 2.0                                | 3.0                                 |
| Poor flexibility                                                                | 2.4                                   | 2.1                                | 2.6                                 |
| Poor nutrition                                                                  | 2.1                                   | 2.3                                | 2.0                                 |
| Mean                                                                            | 26/9=2.9                              | 25/9=2.8                           | 27/9=3.0                            |
| Extrinsic risk factors (coaching, team, club)                                   |                                       |                                    |                                     |
| Lack of communication between medical staff and coaching staff                  | 3.7                                   | 3.6                                | 3.8                                 |
| Lack of regular exposure to high-speed football during training                 | 3.6                                   | 3.8                                | 3.5                                 |
| Load on players                                                                 | 3.5                                   | 3.1                                | 3.8                                 |
| Lack of in-season recovery strategies                                           | 3.5                                   | 3.6                                | 3.4                                 |
| Lack of interest in prevention strategies in the team or club                   | 3.4                                   | 3.3                                | 3.5                                 |
| Playing matches 2-3 times a week                                                | 3.3                                   | 3.4                                | 3.3                                 |
| Lack of regular exposure to strength training (eccentric/ isometric/concentric) | 3.2                                   | 3.4                                | 3.0                                 |
| Training/exercise surveillance by coaching staff                                | 3.2                                   | 3.1                                | 3.3                                 |
| Off-season loading/recovery                                                     | 2.7                                   | 2.4                                | 3.0                                 |
| No and expertise of the medical staff                                           | 2.7                                   | 2.3                                | 3.1                                 |
| Style of coach leadership                                                       | 2.7                                   | 2.1                                | 3.3                                 |
| Medical budget                                                                  | 1.9                                   | 1.4                                | 2.3                                 |
| Mean                                                                            | 37/12=3.1                             | 36/12=3.0                          | 39/12=3.2                           |

scale (very important, important, moderate importance, minor importance, no importance).

on the study design or to contribute to the drafting of this document.

## SURVEY ANALYSIS

Scores  were  as  follows:  very  important  was  weighted  4; important=3;  moderate  importance=2;  minor  importance=1 and no importance=0. A 'no opinion' alternative was  also  available.  Scores  were  then  averaged  and  risk factors  ranked  in  order  of  averages. 19  20 For  each  risk factor,  a  weighted  average  was  calculated  (sum  of  variables x weight)/(sum of all weights).

## Patient and public involvement

This  research  was  carried  out  without  patient  (player) involvement, that is, players were not invited to comment

## RESULTS

Fifteen CMOs replied to the survey. Perceived risk factors, their importance and their weighted average are shown in table 2.

Among  the  21  perceived  modifiable  risk  factors,  12 were considered extrinsic factors (relating to coaching, team  and  club)  and  9  suggested  being  intrinsic  or player  factors.  Further,  the  importance  of  the  factors, as expressed as the mean of the weighted averages, was 3.1  for  the  extrinsic  factors  compared  with  2.9  for  the intrinsic factors. A lack of communication between the medical staff and the coaching staff was perceived as the

most important or second most important risk factor in both subgroups.

The  greatest  difference  between  the  two  groups  was the perception of style of coach leadership as risk factor, the group with higher hamstring injury rates (the HIGH group)  perceived  this  factor  as  57%  more  important compared  with  the  teams  with  less  hamstring  injuries (LOW  group).  The  HIGH  group  also  perceived  the player  factors  fatigue  and  wellness  as  more  important compared  with  the  LOW  group.  The  LOW  group,  on the other hand, perceived a technical issue, the lack of regular exposure to high-  speed football during training as  considerably  more  important  compared  with  the HIGH group (weighted average 3.8 vs 3.5).

## DISCUSSION

This study on modifiable risk factors for hamstring injury among professional football players revealed that CMOs from  elite  football  clubs  that  had  lower  than  average hamstring  injury  rates  during  two  seasons,  differed  in their opinions on which risk factors are important and preventable compared with CMOs from clubs that had higher than average hamstring injury rates. The 15 CMOs included in the study felt that extrinsic (coaching, team, club) rather than intrinsic (players) factors were the most important preventable risk factors.

## Lack of communication between medical staff and coaching staff

A lack of communication between the medical staff and the coaching staff was perceived as the most important or second most important risk factor in both groups.

We  have  previously  reported  an  association  between overall injury rates (not specifically hamstrings injuries) and the quality of internal communication at the club. 21

Elite football clubs with good internal communication had fewer injuries and better player availability than clubs with poor communication. 21

Communication  between  the  head  coach/manager and the  medical  team  was  vital  for  keeping  players  on the  field. 21 It  is  essential  to  communicate  and  discuss medical,  performance  and  technical  status  to  optimise individual  training  and  match  frequency. 3  20 Mistakes happen when communication on prevention, regeneration, load management and rehabilitation breaks down. Management of minor injuries avoids larger injuries, and it is essential to have good communication and to have respect for minor injuries. 21 22 Poor  internal  communication in a club lead to the coaching staff not receiving the  necessary  feedback  they  need  to  create  an  optimal football schema, and too tight a schema results in accumulation of fatigue.

## Coaches are key persons

The  greatest  difference  between  the  HIGH  and  LOW groups  was  the  opinion  on  the  leadership  style  of coaches.  This  is  a  prospective  epidemiological  survey, and this study design does not allow us to evaluate the reasons behind the data. However, based on 21 years of monthly contacts with these elite-  level teams, we do have some hypotheses.

Our basic hypothesis is that the coaches are the most important persons for the injury situation in an elite club, medical staff can only realise suggestions for preventative training  implementation  across  the  whole  team  if  the coach and coaching staffs are positive about the suggestions. 6 23 24

We  have  previously  reported  an  association  between overall  injury  rate  (not  specifically  hamstring  injuries) and the leadership style of the main coach. 25 Clubs with coaches that used a transformational or democratic leadership style had lower hamstring injury rates. 25

One  might  speculate  whether  the  teams  with  high injury  rates  in  this  study  (the  HIGH  group)  had  the perception that the coaching style and communication between the coaches and the medical team was less good. Since the coaches at elite level also decide about load on players, this might explain the higher rating of load on players, fatigue and wellness among players as risk factors for injuries in the HIGH group.

## Training/exercise surveillance by coaching staff

Surveillance with correction of conduction of training/ exercise execution was included as one of seven preventative  measures  in  the  study  by  Ekstrand et  al ;  the  first RCT showing  that  it  is  possible  to  prevent  sports  injuries. 26 Since then, the topic has hardly been investigated.

The  CMOs  in  this  study  commented  that  training/ exercises  performed  in  an  incorrect  manner  can  be counterproductive, especially strength exercises. Diligent surveillance results in players performing exercises optimally,  and  coaches  can  change  things  when  necessary. Engagement and surveillance by the coaching staff have more impact than surveillance by the medical staff. Disciplinary  measures  can  be  taken  by  coaching  staff  when players do not comply.

## Is fatigue the underlying problem behind the perceived risk factors?

Fatigue  is  regarded  as  a  major  risk  factor  behind  most hamstring  injuries. 6  10  12  27-30 Most  of  the  risk  factors perceived by CMOs (table 2) can be divided into two categories both of which lead to fatigue and consequently an increased risk for hamstring injury: (1) Excessive training/ too many matches/overloading with subsequent accumulation of fatigue and (2) Too little specific training leading to muscle underloading. Dysfunction such as lack of eccentric strength, implies that load tolerance of the hamstrings is  not  good  enough,  and  this  may  lead  to  either  fatigue (injuries often appearing late in a match) or muscles not being prepared for match activity (injuries appear early in a match). Figures 1-4 illustrate a theoretical framework for the  correlation  between  fatigue  and  muscle  dysfunction, and risk for hamstring injury.

We have previously reported from the ECIS that muscle injuries  occur  more  frequently  toward  the  end  of  a

Figure 1 For a fresh player who begins a game with peak action performance and normal muscle function that corresponds to the loads demanded by the game, the risk for hamstring injury is minimal. However, as the game proceeds the player's performance may not match loads demanded by the game due to fatigue and the risk for hamstring injury increases.

<!-- image -->

match, 2 6 or during/after a congested match period with little time for recovery. 31 It has also been shown in simulated  football  studies  that  eccentric  hamstring  strength decreases with time, particularly during the second half of a match. 17 30

These findings indirectly suggest an association between fatigue and risk for injury. 12

It is suggested that fatigue leads to poorer neuromuscular  coordination  which  potentially  increases  the  risk for  injury. 12  26 When  running  fast,  the  primary  role  of

## Tired player without deficiency accumulating fatigue during game

<!-- image -->

Peak action load demanded by game

Peak action performed by player

Figure 2 A player with fatigue accumulation due to excessive training/too many matches/overloading but still has normal muscle function begins a game with peak action performance that does not match the loads demanded by the game, and the risk for hamstring injury is already increased at the beginning of the game. As the game proceeds, the mismatch between loads demanded by the game and the player's performance increases due to increasing fatigue, and the risk for hamstring injury increases even more.

Figure 3 A fresh player with muscle dysfunction such as lack of eccentric strength, will begin a game with peak action performance that does not match the load demand of the game and thus has an increased risk for hamstring injury already at the beginning of the game. However, due to increasing fatigue as the game proceeds, the mismatch between loads demanded by the game and player performance increases with consequent increase in the risk for hamstring injury.

<!-- image -->

the hamstring muscle group is active deceleration of the forward moving thigh and lower leg during the terminal swing phase. 24 27 The terminal swing phase is considered the time when most hamstring injuries occur, due to high eccentric force contraction in the extended hamstrings when decelerating the leg. 30 32

Fatigue is a combination of central (brain) and peripheral (muscle) fatigue mechanisms. 12 33 It is believed that

## Tired player with deficiency accumulating fatigue during game

<!-- image -->

Peak action load demanded by game

Peak action performed by player

Figure 4 A player with fatigue accumulation and muscle dysfunction such as poor eccentric strength, will begin a game with a great mismatch between the performance and the loads demanded by the game, and the risk for hamstring injury is already high at the beginning of the game. As the game proceeds fatigue increases with an even greater mismatch between load demanded by the game and the player's performance, and the risk for hamstring injury increases rapidly.

physical  performance  is  largely  affected  by  peripheral (muscle)  fatigue  whereas  technical  performance  more by central (brain and neural) factors. 33

Muscle  fatigue  can  lead  to  injury  situations  due  to poor control of muscles and joints or overloading/overstretching of muscles. Poor recovery from a previous load may increase the vulnerability of the hamstring muscle fibres to subsequent high intensity loads. Neural fatigue may  reduce  the  player's  quality  of  play. 30 Accuracy  is reduced and 'clumsy' play can lead to the player injuring himself  or  an  opponent. 12  27  28 Reactions  and  speed  of play are affected, the player is slower in controlling the ball enabling opponents to get closer leading to contact situations that increase the risk for injury.

However, despite common belief and studies indirectly suggesting that fatigue is associated with injury, scientific evidence supporting this theory is weak. 19

In  this  study,  the  teams  with  high  hamstring  injury rates  (the  HIGH group) ranked fatigues as a considerably more important risk factor compared with the LOW group with less hamstring injury rates (ranking of importance 3.6 vs 2.6, see table 2).

The finding might be the consequence of the HIGH group teams having a lot of accumulated fatigue which in turn could be due to leadership leading to unbalanced training  load,  whereas  in  the  LOW  group  teams  there might be less accumulated fatigue, maybe because of a more balanced training load.

Accumulated fatigue is a consequence of unbalanced training which in turn might partly be due to the leadership style of the coach but also due to lack of knowledge in coaches about periodisation of load.

## Off-season load/recovery

The  off-  season  is  a  crucial  period  for  physical  and mental  recovery, 34 and  detrimental  changes  in  fitness may occur during this period. 35 If  players  refrain  from training during the off-  season or take longer breaks in training, football fitness and muscle strength will decline increasing the risk for hamstring injury. 34 So besides the necessary days off for recovery, it would be wise to also do some training in this period to remain football fitness and continue load on muscles and tendons. This especially counts for players who had less load in the previous season (for example due to injuries).

Furthermore,  many  top  European  clubs  also  devote part of the preseason to ''promotional travel'' which also reduces the number of days available for training especially when travelling through time zones, which causes more  fatigue  and  therefore  requires  different  training load in this period. 36

## Lack of regular speed training (high-velocity football)

The CMOs in the LOW team group (teams having less hamstring  injuries)  perceived  lack  of  regular  speed training as the most important risk factor for hamstring injury at the professional level.  Hamstring  injuries most frequently occur during sprinting and  other high-  velocity  moves. 14 Regular  consistent  exposure  to high-  speed  play  prepares  the  hamstrings  for  similar moves during games. 20 34 Lack  of  sufficient  high-  speed play  during  training  increases  the  risk  for  hamstring injury during games. Training should mimic match play in  order  to  adapt  the  muscles  to  loads  at  matches. 14 37 Training  sessions  should  not  only  include  basic  action such  as  running  or  sprinting  but  should  also  include match-  like situations where play depends on the football actions of opponents and the player's response to those actions. 14 28

## Residual weakness after a previous hamstring injury

Previous injury is reported to be the most important risk factor  for  hamstring  injury,  but  unfortunately  this  is  a non-  modifiable factor. 6 10 11 13 38 However, residual weakness  after  a  previous  injury  is  modifiable.  Both  groups reported  residual  weakness  after  a  previous  hamstring injury to be the most important or second most important risk factor in individual players.

Insufficient  rehabilitation  (both  strength  and  speed) results in lower load capacity of the muscle and puts it at  higher  injury  risk  during  high-  speed  play. 13 Furthermore, residual weakness after a previous injury may lead to muscle imbalance, increasing the risk of fatigue in the weak  muscle. 12 Studies  suggest  a  change  in  neuromuscular control after a hamstring injury with lengthening of the muscle leading to falls in strength and EMG activation. 39 40

## Lack of regular strength training (eccentric/isometric/ concentric)

Based on the assumption that hamstring injuries occur due to insufficient muscle strength, 41 the CMOs stressed the  importance  of  strength  training  to  avoid  muscle injury.  Hamstring  injury  prevention  should  not  only focus on eccentric strength training, but also isometric and concentric training, including combinations of knee and hip dominant exercises. There is some evidence that eccentric exercise can prevent hamstring injury, 42 43 but there are few studies showing how other types of strength training can prevent hamstring injuries. 19 41

## What does this mean in practice?

If fatigue is the main risk factor and the reason for fatigue is  either  excessive  training/loading  or  poor  training, then  focus  should  be  on  coaching  team  players  at  an optimal level. Cooperation and communication between the coaching staff and the medical staff are vital. It is the coach that decides on and leads football activities and the degree of loading of players, and they must be aware of the possible connection between hamstring injuries and fatigue, overloading and poor training. However, to optimise match/training and thus avoid fatigue, the coaches must be informed by the medical team and listen to the players.

## Methodological considerations

A main strength of this study is that its design follows the international consensus statements and reporting guidelines for epidemiological research in sport. 16-18

The  study  has  limitations.  First,  hamstring  injury, according to our inclusion criteria, comprises a heterogeneous group including structural (partial or total muscle fibre ruptures) and functional (no macroscopic muscle fibre disruption) injuries, with different foci and severity. Second, there may be different causes for acute or gradual onset hamstring injuries. This was not considered in the present  study.  The  study  is  also  limited  by  a  relatively small  sample  size  and  a  short  observation  period.  The generalisability of the results from these 15 clubs to other high-  level or semiprofessional clubs is unclear. Finally, as this is  a  descriptive study, we cannot infer any causality between expert opinions on risk factors and injury rates since  the  clubs  may  have  differed  regarding  other  risk factors  for  hamstring  injury  or  confounding  factors unknown to us.

## Twitter Wart Van Zoest @wartvanzoest

Acknowledgements The authors thank the participating clubs for their participation in the study. A special thanks to Dr Steve McNally, Manchester United and Dr Nelson Puga, Porto FC. Mrs Mirjam Kuipers is gratefully acknowledged for the design of the figures.

Contributors JE was responsible for the conception of the study. JE and HB were involved in the data collection. HB conducted the analyses. JE drafted the manuscript, which was critically revised by the coauthors. JE is the study guarantor.

Funding This study was funded by grants from the Union of European Football Associations.

Competing interests None declared.

Patient and public involvement Patients and/or the public were not involved in the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.

Patient consent for publication Consent obtained directly from patient(s).

Ethics approval Written informed consent was collected from all participating clubs. The study plan underwent an ethical review and was approved by UEFA.

Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Data availability statement No data are available. The dataset from this study is held securely in coded form and data are not available to the public.

Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-  NC 4.0) license, which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-  commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use is non-  commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.

## ORCID iD

Jan Ekstrand http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6092-266X

## REFERENCES

- 1  Waldén M, Hägglund M, Ekstrand J. UEFA champions League study: a prospective study of injuries in professional football during the 2001-  2002 season. Br J Sports Med 2005;39:542-6.
- 2  Ekstrand J, Hägglund M, Waldén M. Injury incidence and injury patterns in professional football: the UEFA injury study. Br J Sports Med 2011;45:553-8.
- 3  Ekstrand J, Hägglund M, Kristenson K, et al . Fewer ligament injuries but no preventive effect on muscle injuries and severe injuries: an 11-  year follow-  up of the UEFA champions League injury study. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:732-7.
- 4 Ekstrand J. Preventing injuries in professional football: thinking bigger and working together. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:709-10.
- 5  Ekstrand J, Spreco A, Bengtsson H, et al . Injury rates decreased in men's professional football: an 18-  year prospective cohort study of almost 12 000 injuries sustained during 1.8 million hours of play. Br J Sports Med 2021;55:1084-92.
- 6  Ekstrand J, Bengtsson H, Waldén M. Hamstring injury rates have increased during recent seasons and now constitute 24% of all injuries in men's professional football: the UEFA Elite Club Injury Study from 2001/02 to 2021/22. Br J Sports Med 2022.
- 7 Hägglund M, Waldén M, Ekstrand J. Injury recurrence is lower at the highest professional football level than at national and amateur levels: does sports medicine and sports physiotherapy deliver? Br J Sports Med 2016;50:751-8.
- 8  Ekstrand J, Waldén M, Hägglund M. Hamstring injuries have increased by 4% annually in men's professional football, since 2001: a 13-  year longitudinal analysis of the UEFA Elite Club injury study. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:731-7.
- 9 Ekstrand J, Gillquist J. The avoidability of soccer injuries. Int J Sports Med 1983;4:124-8.
- 10  Hägglund M, Waldén M, Ekstrand J. Risk factors for lower extremity muscle injury in professional soccer: the UEFA injury study. Am J Sports Med 2013;41:327-35.
- 11 Freckleton G, Pizzari T. Risk factors for hamstring muscle strain injury in sport: a systematic review and meta-  analysis. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:351-8.
- 12  Huygaerts S, Cos F, Cohen D. Mechanisms of hamstring strain injury: interactions between fatigue, muscle activation and function. Sports 2020;8:65 Opar DA,Williams MD, Shield AJ. Hamstring strain injuries: factors that lead to injury and re-  injury. Sports Med 2012;42:209-26.
- 13  Green B, Bourne MN, van Dyk N, et al . Recalibrating the risk of hamstring strain injury (HSI): a 2020 systematic review and metaanalysis of risk factors for index and recurrent hamstring strain injury in sport. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1081-8.
- 14 Gronwald T, Klein C, Hoenig T, et al . Hamstring injury patterns in professional male football (soccer): a systematic video analysis of 52 cases. Br J Sports Med 2022;56:1-7.
- 15 Biz C, Nicoletti P , Baldin G, et al . Hamstring strain injury (HSI) prevention in professional and semi-  professional football teams: a systematic review and meta-  analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18:8272.
- 16  Hägglund M, Waldén M, Bahr R, et al . Methods for epidemiological study of injuries to professional football players: developing the UEFA model. Br J Sports Med 2005;39:340-6.
- 17 Fuller CW, Ekstrand J, Junge A, et al . Consensus statement on injury definitions and data collection procedures in studies of football (soccer) injuries. Br J Sports Med 2006;40:193-201.
- 18  Bahr R, Clarsen B, Derman W, et al . International Olympic Committee consensus statement: methods for recording and reporting of epidemiological data on injury and illness in sport 2020 (including STROBE extension for sport injury and illness surveillance (STROBE-  SIIS)). Br J Sports Med 2020;54:372-89.
- 19  McCall A, Carling C, Davison M, et al . Injury risk factors, screening tests and preventative strategies: a systematic review of the evidence that underpins the perceptions and practices of 44 football (soccer) teams from various premier leagues. Br J Sports Med 2015;49:583-9.
- 20 McCall A, Dupont G, Ekstrand J. Injury prevention strategies, coach compliance and player adherence of 33 of the UEFA elite Club injury study teams: a survey of teams' head medical officers. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:725-30.
- 21  Ekstrand J, Lundqvist D, Davison M, et al . Communication quality between the medical team and the head coach/manager is associated with injury burden and player availability in elite football clubs. Br J Sports Med 2019;53:304-8.
- 22 Ekstrand J, Gillquist J. Soccer injuries and their mechanisms: a prospective study. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1983;15:267-70.
- 23  Ekstrand J, Bengtsson H, Walden M, et al . Still poorly adopted in male professional football: but teams that used the Nordic Hamstring Exercise in team training had fewer hamstring injuries - a retrospective survey of 17 teams of the UEFA Elite Club Injury Study during the 2020-  2021 season. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med 2022;8:e001368.
- 24 Ekstrand J. Keeping your top players on the pitch: the key to football medicine at a professional level. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:723-4.
- 25  Ekstrand J, Lundqvist D, Lagerbäck L, et al . Is there a correlation between coaches' leadership styles and injuries in elite football teams? A study of 36 elite teams in 17 countries. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:527-31.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

- 26 Ekstrand J, Gillquist J, Liljedahl SO. Prevention of soccer injuries. supervision by doctor and physiotherapist. Am J Sports Med 1983;11:116-20.
- 27 Greig M, Siegler JC. Soccer-  specific fatigue and eccentric hamstrings muscle strength. J Athl Train 2009;44:180-4.
- 28 Opar DA, Williams MD, Shield AJ. Hamstring strain injuries: factors that lead to injury and re-  injury. Sports Med 2012;42:209-26.
- 29  Marshall PWM, Lovell R, Jeppesen GK, et al . Hamstring muscle fatigue and central motor output during a simulated soccer match. PLoS One 2014;9:e102753.
- 30  Wilmes E, DE Ruiter CJ, Bastiaansen BJC, et al . Associations between hamstring fatigue and sprint kinematics during a simulated football (soccer) match. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2021;53:2586-95.
- 31  Bengtsson H, Ekstrand J, Waldén M, et al . Muscle injury rate in professional football is higher in matches played within 5 days since the previous match: a 14-  year prospective study with more than 130 000 match observations. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:1116-22.
- 32 van Dyk N, Bahr R, Burnett AF , et al . No association between rate of torque development and onset of muscle activity with increased risk of hamstring injury in elite football. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2018;28:2153-63.
- 33 Marqués-  Jiménez D, Calleja-  González J, Arratibel I, et al . Fatigue and recovery in soccer: evidence and challenges. Open Sports Sci J 2017;10:52-70.
- 34 Nassis GP , Brito J, Figueiredo P , et al . Injury prevention training in football: let's bring it to the real world. Br J Sports Med 2019;53:1328-9.
- 35  Clemente FM, Ramirez-  Campillo R, Sarmento H. Detrimental effects of the off-  season in soccer players: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Sports Med 2021;51:795-814.
- 36 Ekstrand J, Spreco A, Windt J, et al . Are elite soccer teams' Preseason training sessions associated with fewer In-  Season injuries? A 15-  year analysis from the Union of European football associations (UEFA) elite Club injury study. Am J Sports Med 2020;48:723-9.
- 37  Verheijen R. Football Coaching theory. The fundamentals how to coach football. Part 1. In: Football coach evolution bv , 2020. ISBN: 978 90 830709 0 2.
- 38 Hägglund M, Waldén M, Ekstrand J. Previous injury as a risk factor for injury in elite football: a prospective study over two consecutive seasons. Br J Sports Med 2006;40:767-72.
- 39 Sole G, Milosavljevic S, Nicholson HD, et al . Selective strength loss and decreased muscle activity in hamstring injury. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2011;41:354-63.
- 40  Opar DA, Williams MD, Timmins RG, et al . Knee flexor strength and bicep femoris electromyographical activity is lower in previously strained hamstrings. J Electromyogr Kinesiol 2013;23:696-703.
- 41 Bahr R, Thorborg K, Ekstrand J. Evidence-  Based hamstring injury prevention is not adopted by the majority of champions League or Norwegian premier League football teams: the Nordic hamstring survey. Br J Sports Med 2015;49:1466-71.
- 42  Mjølsnes R, Arnason A, Østhagen T, et al . A 10-  week randomized trial comparing eccentric vs. concentric hamstring strength training in well-  trained soccer players. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2004;14:311-7.
- 43  Petersen J, Thorborg K, Nielsen MB, et al . Preventive effect of eccentric training on acute hamstring injuries in men's soccer: a cluster-  randomized controlled trial. Am J Sports Med 2011;39:2296-303.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.