## Research article

## The effect of gender and fatigue on the biomechanics of bilateral landings from a jump: Peak values

## Evangelos Pappas 1 GLYPH&lt;c=13,font=/BMLGAK+Wingdings-Regular&gt; , Ali Sheikhzadeh 2 , Marshall Hagins 1 and Margareta Nordin 2

- 1 Division of Physical Therapy, Long Island University, Brooklyn, NY, USA
2. Occupational &amp; Industrial Orthopaedic Center, NYU-Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York, NY, USA

## Abstract

Female athletes are substantially more susceptible than males to suffer  acute  non-contact  anterior  cruciate  ligament  injury.  A limited number of studies have identified possible biomechanical risk factors that differ between genders. The effect of fatigue on  the  biomechanics  of  landing  has  also  been  inadequately investigated.  The  objective  of  the  study  was  to  examine  the effect  of  gender  and  fatigue  on  peak  values  of  biomechanical variables  during  landing  from  a  jump.  Thirty-two  recreational athletes  performed  bilateral  drop  jump  landings  from  a  40  cm platform.  Kinetic,  kinematic  and  electromyographic  data  were collected before and after a functional fatigue protocol. Females landed with 9° greater peak knee valgus (p = 0.001) and 140% greater  maximum  vertical  ground  reaction  forces  (p  =  0.003) normalized  to  body  weight  compared  to  males.  Fatigue  increased  peak foot  abduction by  1.7°  (p  =  0.042),  peak  rectus femoris activity by 27% (p = 0.018), and peak vertical ground reaction  force  (p  =  0.038)  by  20%.  The  results  of  the  study suggest that landing with increased peak knee valgus and vertical  ground  reaction  force  may  contribute  to  increased  risk  for knee  injury  in  females.  Fatigue  caused  significant  but  small changes  on  some  biomechanical  variables.  Anterior  cruciate ligament  injury  prevention  programs  should  focus  on  implementing  strategies  to  effectively  teach  females  to  control  knee valgus and ground reaction force.

suggesting that biomechanical and neuromuscular factors appear  to  be  the  most  important  factors  associated  with ACL injury and the higher incidence of injury in female athletes  (Griffin,  2001).  A  primary  recommendation  of the conference was that research efforts should focus on the  investigation  of  biomechanical  risk  factors  (Griffin, 2001;  Harmon  and  Ireland,  2000)  during  activities  that can cause knee injury, such as landing from a jump. Twothirds  of  ACL  injuries  occur  via  a  non-contact  mechanism, and the majority of these injuries occur at landing from a jump (Arendt and Dick, 1995; Boden et al., 2000; Gray et al., 1985; Griffin et al., 2000; 2001; Hewett et al., 1999;  Kirialanis  et  al.  2003;  Kirkendall  and  Garrett, 2000).

Key  words: Anterior  cruciate  ligament  injury,  injury  prevention, knee injury, sports biomechanics.

## Introduction

Anterior  cruciate  ligament  (ACL)  tear  is  a  debilitating sports injury with an estimated 80,000 ACL occurrences in  the  United  States  annually  (Griffin  et  al.,  2000;  Miyasaka et al., 1991; Pedowitz et al., 2003). The literature almost  unanimously  suggests  that  females  are  substantially more susceptible than males in suffering acute noncontact injury of the ACL (Arendt and Dick, 1995; Delfico  and  Garrett,  1998;  Gray  et  al.,  1985;  Griffin,  2001; Hutchinson and Ireland, 1995; Messina et al., 1999; Powell and Barber-Foss, 2000; Stevenson et al., 1998; Tillman et al., 2002). The ACL injury rate in females is higher in a variety  of  exercise  activities  such  as  soccer  (2-6  times higher), basketball (4-10 times higher) and military training (10 times higher) (Arendt and Dick, 1995; Gray et al., 1985; Griffin, 2001; Hutchinson and Ireland, 1995; Messina et al., 1999; Powell and Barber-Foss, 2000).

A  conference  on  the  prevention  of  ACL  injuries sponsored  by the  American  Orthopaedic  Society  for Sports  Medicine  in  1999  issued  a  consensus  statement

Although the ACL gender bias is likely multifactorial, three main theories have been proposed to explain the higher  incidence  of  female  ACL  injury:  the  ligament dominance  theory  (Hewett  et  al.,  2001),  the  quadriceps dominance theory (Hewett et al., 2001), and the straight knee  landing  theory  (Huston  et  al.,  2001).  The  ligament dominance theory suggests that the lower extremity muscles  do  not  adequately  absorb  the  impact  of  landing,  resulting in knee valgus which causes increased loading of the  ACL (Ford  et  al.,  2003).  The  quadriceps  dominance theory suggests that females tend to rely on their quadriceps more than their hamstrings creating excessive anterior  translation  of  the  tibia  (Ford  et  al.,  2003;  Hewett  et al.,  1996;  Huston  and  Wojtys,  1996).  The  straight  knee landing  theory  suggests  that  females  exhibit  less  knee flexion at the time of impact that may lead to ACL injury either  by  hyperextension  or  by  anterior  tibial  translation (Decker  et  al.,  2003;  Huston  et  al.,  2001).  The  present study investigated whether there is support for these three theories in a controlled laboratory environment by collecting biomechanical data for males and females as they are landing from a drop jump.

Fatigue  is  another  factor  that  has  been  linked  to athletic  injuries.  Several  epidemiological  studies  support the notion that fatigue is a predisposing factor responsible for  increased  number  of  injuries  (Bottini  et  al.,  2000; Gabbett,  2000;  2002;  Hawkins  et  al.,  2001;  Kersey  and Rowan, 1983; Rahnama et al., 2002). Despite this, a very limited  number  of  studies  have  examined  the  effect  of fatigue  on  biomechanical  variables  during  drop  landing (Fagenbaum  and  Darling,  2003;  Madigan  and  Pidcoe, 2003; Rozzi et al., 1999a) and only one of them (Madigan and Pidcoe, 2003) has used a functional fatigue protocol consisting  of  tasks  that  mimic  sports  activities  such  as squat and jumping.

In a study (Rozzi et al., 1999a) of male and female athletes who were fatigued to 25% of their original torque with the use of an isokinetic dynamometer, the researchers  found  decreased  knee  proprioception  and  increased onset of contraction time for the hamstrings and the gastrocnemius  as  subjects  performed  a  landing  task.  They found no significant effect of gender or fatigue on balance or  anterior  tibial  translation.  However,  males  exhibited significantly  increased  mean  vastus  lateralis  normalized EMG (NEMG) after fatigue compared to females (Rozzi et  al.,  1999a).  The  authors  acknowledged  that  a  significant  limitation  of  their  study  was  the  non-functional  fatigue protocol (isokinetic) (Rozzi et al., 1999a). Madigan and  Pidcoe  (2003)  looked  at  the  effects  of  a  functional fatigue  protocol  on  the  biomechanics  of  landing  but  all subjects were male and the authors did not collect frontal plane knee kinematic data.

Fagenbaum and Darling (2003) concluded that fatigue had a similar effect on males and females but they used  an  isokinetic  fatigue  protocol  which  may  not  have replicated the fatigue that athletes  experience  during sports.  Chappell  et  al.  (2005)  suggested  that  a  fatigue protocol of vertical jumps and sprints  caused subjects to land  with  increased  proximal  tibia  peak  anterior  shear forces  and  decreased  knee  flexion  at  the  time  that  peak anterior  shear  forces  occur.  Moreover,  females  landed with an external knee valgus moment that was increased in  the  post-fatigue  condition  while  males  exhibited  an external varus moment. Females also exhibited a greater external knee flexion moment that the authors suggested may  be  due  to  increased  quadriceps  contraction,  decreased hamstrings contraction or a combination of both conditions.  However,  NEMG  data  was  not  collected  to further  clarify  the  mechanism  that  leads  to  an  increased external knee flexion moment.

The  primary  aim  of  the  present  study  was  to  determine the effect of gender and fatigue on peak NEMG, kinetic,  and  kinematic  variables  during  bilateral  drop landings  from  a  40  cm  platform.  We  hypothesized  that females will exhibit landing biomechanics that predispose them to knee injury [greater knee valgus, greater vertical ground  reaction  force  (VGRF)]  and  that  males  and  females will  land  with  increased  knee  valgus,  VGRF,  and NEMG activity of the rectus femoris and hamstrings after the fatigue protocol.

## Methods

The study was conducted at the Harkness Dance Center Motion  Analysis  Laboratory,  NYU  -  Hospital  for  Joint Diseases. It was a repeated measures pre-fatigue and postfatigue  experimental  study  using  measures  of  EMG,  kinetic, and kinematic data.

Based on a power analysis of the findings of a pilot study (3 males and 3 females) this study required 32 subjects to answer the hypotheses with a power of 0.8 and α level of 0.05. Power analysis was performed with the use of  G  Power  for  knee  valgus,  VGRF,  and  rectus  femoris NEMG (Buchner et al., 1997).

Thirty-two  subjects  were  recruited  from  universities  and  colleges  in  the  New  York  City  area  via  announcements  during  classes. Only  healthy volunteers between the ages of 20-40 years were recruited because this age group is more susceptible to ACL injury (Griffin, 2001).  The  inclusion  criteria  included  participation  in recreational sports at least twice/week for a minimum of 45 min. per practice session.

Exclusion criteria were: obesity (body mass index greater  than  30  kg·m -2 );  a  history  of  injuries  and/or  diseases that would render unsafe the execution of the protocol;  and  a  history  of  injuries  and/or  diseases  that  could affect the biomechanics of landing such as lower extremity fractures. Subjects were excluded if they had received specialized  training  in  jumping  and  landing  techniques such as through participation in gymnastics or dance.

All 32 subjects completed the entire protocol (prefatigue data collection, fatigue protocol, and post-fatigue data  collection)  in  a  single  session.  Subjects  performed bilateral landings on a force plate from a 40 cm platform. The  height  was  chosen  to  allow  comparisons  with  the findings of other investigators who used similar protocols ( Decker et al., 2003; Fagenbaum and Darling, 2003; Ford et  al.,  2003;  Madigan  and  Pidcoe,  2003;  Rozzi  et  al., 1999a; 1999b) and as in these studies all subjects landed from the same height in an effort to minimize variability.

All  NEMG  and  kinematic  measurements  were  in reference to the right lower extremity. The literature supports that athletes injure the dominant and non-dominant extremity with equal frequency (Matava et al., 2002), and therefore  comparisons  between  the  dominant  and  nondominant limb were not performed.

EMG data were collected with the Noraxon Myosystem  1400  (Noraxon  USA,  Inc.,  Scottsdale,  AZ).  The electrodes  were  disposable,  surface,  passive  electrodes (Blue  Sensor,  Ambu,  Inc.,  Linthicum,  MD).  The  force plate was an OR6-5  AMTI  biomechanical platform (AMTI, Watertown, MA). Kinematic data were collected with  the  use  of  eight  Eagle  cameras  (Motion  Analysis Corp.  Santa  Rosa,  CA)  and  reflective  markers  were placed as per the 'Helen Hayes system' (Richards, 2002). The software for data collection was the EvaRT 4.0 (Motion  Analysis  Corp.  Santa  Rosa,  CA).  Video  data  were smoothed using a Butterworth fourth order low pass filter with a cut-off frequency of 6 Hz. EMG data were filtered through a low pass 2 nd order Butterworth filter with a 6Hz cut-off frequency.

The  force  platform  was  time  synchronized  to  the EMG  and  the  motion  analysis  system.  The  kinetic  and EMG data were  sampled  at  1200  Hz  and  the  kinematic data were sampled at 240 Hz as appropriate for fast athletic  maneuvers.  Before  each  data  collection  session  the system was calibrated to the manufacturer's recommendations.

Subjects were verbally informed of the study protocol and all risks and possible harms as described in the consent form. All subjects completed a sports activity and medical  history  questionnaire,  signed  a  consent  form approved by the NYU School of Medicine IRB, and were measured for height, weight, knee width, foot width, and foot length.

The  skin  was  prepared  and  the  surface  electrodes were placed on the medial gastrocnemius, rectus femoris, biceps femoris, and medial hamstrings as described elsewhere  (Fagenbaum  and  Darling,  2003).  These  sites  of

electrode placement are consistent with recent guidelines (Hermens et al., 2000) and are located between the motor point and the distal tendon in order to improve intra and inter-subject comparison reliability (Basmajian and DeLuca,  1985).  Two  electrodes  were  placed  on  each muscle at a 20 mm distance and parallel to fiber orientation  (Hermens  et  al.,  2000).  Athletic  tape  was  used  to fixate  the  electrodes  and  decrease  movement  artifact (Hermens  et  al.,  2000).  The  reflective  markers  were placed  bilaterally  on  the  second  metatarsal,  calcaneus, lateral  malleolus,  fibula,  lateral  knee  joint  line,  thigh, anterior  superior  iliac  spine,  acromion,  lateral  humeral epicondyle, and distal radioulnar joint. Reflective markers were  also  placed  on  the  sacrum  and  the  left  posterior superior  iliac  spine  (offset)  as  per  the  'Helen  Hayes' system  (Richards,  2002).  An  initial  'neutral'  standing position of each subject was used to account for skeletal alignment differences as in similar studies (Hewett et al., 2005;  Kernozek  et  al.,  2005).  With  this  technique,  zero degree  angles  were  defined  as  the  angles  between  adjacent segments during the neutral standing trial.

The subjects were allowed two practice jumps and then performed three bilateral drop jumps from the 40 cm platform. They were instructed to drop directly down off the box and land with both legs on the force plate. Subjects did not receive any instructions on the landing technique to avoid a coaching effect. The effect of the arms was minimized by asking the subjects to keep their arms crossed against their chest (Rodacki et al., 2002; Decker et al., 2003). Trials were repeated when they were judged as  non-acceptable  (such  as  when  subjects  lost  their  balance  or  did  not  land  with  both  feet  on  the  force  plate). Upon  completion  of  three  successful  jumps,  the  wires were disconnected from the electrodes (but the electrodes were  not  removed).  The  subjects  followed  the  fatigue protocol  that  consisted  of  100  consecutive  jumps  over short (5-7 cm) obstacles and 50 maximal vertical jumps. This  combination  of  activities  was  chosen  to  simulate activities  commonly performed in sports and because an eccentric-concentric fatigue protocol is more effective in producing fatigue than a concentric fatigue protocol (Svantesson  et  al.,  1998).  The  fatigue  protocol  was  designed in a way that the fatigue-induced pattern is applicable  to  functional  activities  outside  the  laboratory  setting. The protocol used in the present study is similar to fatigue protocols used in recent research ( Chappell et al., 2005; Madigan and Pidcoe, 2003). Similar protocols were sufficient in inducing fatigue as measured by quadriceps force  output  and  jump  height  (Skurvydas  et  al.,  2000; 2002)  and  mean  EMG  frequency  (Madigan  and  Pidcoe, 2003). Moreover, the demands of games such as soccer are  very  similar  for  males  and  females  in  terms  of  distance  covered,  sprint duration, and  exercise  intensity (Davis  and  Brewer,  1993)  suggesting  that  laboratory fatigue protocols have greater applicability if they fatigue male and female athletes in a similar way as occurs on the athletic  field.  After  the  fatigue  protocol  was  completed, the  wires  were  re-connected  to  the  EMG  electrodes  and the same procedure of landings was repeated for the postfatigue part of data collection. All subjects completed all post-fatigue trials within six minutes after the completion of the fatigue protocol. The landing cycle was defined as the time between initial contact and peak knee flexion.

The  Orthotrak  5.0  (Motion  Analysis  Corp.  Santa Rosa, CA) software was used to derive kinetic, kinematic, and EMG variables. The peak value for all variables during the landing cycle were identified and averaged across the  three  trials. The  VGRF  was  normalized  to  body weight as in previous studies (Hewett et al., 1996; 1999). EMG amplitude was normalized to the maximum linearenveloped EMG of each muscle (Arampatzis et al., 2003; Horita et al., 1999; Rodacki et al., 2002; Viitasalo et al., 1998)  exhibited  during  the  landing  phase  of  bilateral landings from a 20 cm platform (mean of three trials).

## Statistical analysis

Gender differences for anthropometric and sports participation  variables  were  tested  with  independent  sample  ttests.  A  repeated  measures  MANOVA  was  performed with the use of a statistical software package (SPSS 12.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, 60606) with gender and fatigue as  independent  variables.,  The  dependent  variables  were peak values for knee flexion, knee valgus, foot abduction, VGRF,  quadriceps  NEMG,  lateral  hamstrings  NEMG, medial hamstrings NEMG, and gastrocnemius NEMG as well as knee flexion angle at impact.  The data were inspected and tested to insure that the assumptions for data normality  of  the  univariate  and  multivariate  repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA and MANOVA) were not violated, Separate univariate repeated measures ANOVA  were  performed  for  each  dependent  variable when the MANOVA reached statistical significance (p &lt; 0.05) (Bray and Maxwell, 1985; Stevens, 2002). Cohen's d statistic of effect size was calculated in order to give a more  complete  picture  of  the  effect  of  the  independent variables  on  the  dependent  variables.  The  effect  size  is defined as trivial if it is &lt;0.2, small 0.2-0.5, medium 0.50.8, and large&gt;0.8 (Portney and Watkins, 2000).

## Results

Table 1  shows  the  descriptive  statistics  of  demographic, anthropometric, and sports participation data. There were no gender differences in regards to age and sports activity. As expected, there were differences in the anthropometric variables between genders.

Table  1.  Demographic,  anthropometric  and  sports  activity data  for  males  and  females,  p-values  of  t-test.  Data  are means (±SD).

|                         | Male (n = 16)   | Female (n = 16)   |
|-------------------------|-----------------|-------------------|
| Height (m)              | 1.82 (.07)      | 167 (.05) *       |
| Weight (kg)             | 81 (10)         | 59 (6) *          |
| Age (yrs)               | 28.8 (3.9)      | 28.2 (5.4)        |
| Sports activity (hr/wk) | 6.5 (2.9)       | 6.5 (5.9)         |

* Significant differences p &lt; 0.001.

The results  of  the  MANOVA showed that the effects of gender (F9,22 = 5.763, p &lt; 0.001) and fatigue (F9,22 = 2.934, p = 0.019) were statistically significant but not the  interaction  of  gender  and  fatigue  (F 9,22 =  1.050,  p  = 0.434).

Table 2. Means, (95% confidence internals) and p-values for gender differences (LSD test) of biomechanical variables measured during landing.

| Variables                       | Males            | Females          | P-value (Cohen's d)   |
|---------------------------------|------------------|------------------|-----------------------|
| Peak Knee valgus (°)            | 6.0 (2.3-9.7)    | 14.9 (11.2-18.6) | .001 * (1.18)         |
| Peak foot abduction (°)         | 6.2 (3.2-9.3)    | 8.7 (5.6-11.7)   | .262 (.39)            |
| Peak VGRF (BW)                  | 3.9 (3.3-4.5)    | 5.3 (4.7-6.0)    | .003 * (1.08)         |
| Peak Rectus NEMG(%)             | 137 (116-157)    | 159 (138-180)    | .132 (.45)            |
| Peak Medial Hamstrings NEMG(%)  | 127 (94-160)     | 122 (89-155)     | .832 (.07)            |
| Peak Lateral Hamstrings NEMG(%) | 113 (87-139)     | 123 (97-149)     | .589 (.16)            |
| Peak Gastrocnemius NEMG(%)      | 134 (112-157)    | 122 (99-145)     | .438 (.22)            |
| Knee Flexion at contact (°)     | 20.2 (15.8-24.6) | 20.0 (15.6-24.4) | .957 (.02)            |

* Statistically significant at α =0.05

Abbreviations: LSD = least significant difference, VGRF = vertical ground reaction force, BW = body weight, NEMG = normalized electromyography.

Univariate  repeated  measures  ANOVA  revealed that females landed with greater peak knee valgus (F1,30 = 12.242, p = 0.001) and peak VGRF (F1,30 = 10.548, p = 0.003)  but  knee  flexion  at  contact  was  not  different  between males and females (F1,30 = 0.003, p = 0.957). After the  fatigue  protocol  subjects  landed  with  increased  peak foot  abduction (F1,30 =  4.534,  p  =  0.042),  peak  VGRF (F1,30 =4.7,  p  =  0.038),  and  peak  rectus  NEMG  (F1,30  = 6.252, p = 0.018). Tables 2 and 3 show the means (95% confidence intervals) and p-values (Cohen's d effect size statistic)  for  all  dependent  variables  grouped  by  gender and fatigue condition respectively.

and  Garrett,  2000;  Zeller  et  al.,  2003).  Moreover,  in  a prospective  study  (Hewett  et  al.,  2005),  female  athletes who  subsequently  suffered  ACL  injury  were  found  to have  increased  peak  knee  valgus  compared  to  female athletes who did not injure their ACL. The findings of this study provide further evidence that knee valgus is one of the key gender differences that may explain the increased incidence of ACL injuries in females.

## Discussion

The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of  gender  and  fatigue  on  the  kinetics,  kinematics,  and NEMG of the lower extremity during landing from a drop jump.  Gender  had  a  significant  effect  on  one  kinematic variable (knee valgus) and the sole kinetic variable studied  (VGRF).  The  findings  regarding  knee  valgus  agree with  previous  studies  (Ford  et  al.,  2003;  Hewett  et  al., 2004; Kernozek et al., 2005) demonstrating that females exhibit  greater  knee  valgus  than  males  during  landing from a jump. Increased knee valgus may produce excessive  stress  on  the  inert  structures  and  lead  to  traumatic injury,  consistent  with  the  ligament  dominance  theory (Ford et al., 2003; Hewett et al., 2004).

The effect of gender on VGRF was also significant with females landing with higher normalized VGRF than males (5.3 BW vs. 3.9 BW). The VGRF reveals the ability  of  the  athlete  to  efficiently  attenuate  the  impact  of landing. The lower the VGRF the more optimal the landing strategy, while high VGRF can lead to knee injuries (Dufec and Bates, 1991; Hewett et al., 1996; 2005). The VGRF  findings  of  the  present  study  show  that  females experience  greater  peak  impact  forces  that  may  predispose them to non-contact injuries as they transfer to more proximal joints of the kinetic chain, such as the knee joint.

Studies have shown that the knee is in a position of valgus  at  the  time  of  ACL  injury  (Boden  et  al.,  2000; Delfico  and  Garrett,  1998;  Griffin,  2001;  Griffin  et  al., 2000; Olsen et al., 2004) and that females exhibit greater peak knee valgus than males in a variety of athletic activities  (Ferber  et  al.,  2003;  Horita  et  al.,  1999;  Kirkendall

To  the  authors'  knowledge,  only  one  more  study (Kernozek et al., 2005) has suggested that females landing from a drop jump have increased normalized VGRF compared to males. A study by Hewett et al. (1996) showed that a plyometric training program is effective in reducing peak VGRF in female athletes. VGRF has been shown to be modifiable with training (Hewett et al., 1996), linked to injury risk (Dufec and Bates, 1991; Hewett et al., 1996; 2005) and a significant gender difference as per the findings  of  the  current  study.  Injury  prevention  programs should consider training females to land with a decreased VGRF in order to decrease risk of ACL injury.

Gender did not have a statistically significant effect on  the  peak  NEMG  of  any  of  the  muscles  measured. However, females landed with 22% higher rectus femoris

Table 3. Means, (95% confidence internals) and p-values for the effect of fatigue (LSD test) of biomechanical variables measured during landing.

| Variables                       | Pre-fatigue      | Post-fatigue     | P-value (Cohen's d)   |
|---------------------------------|------------------|------------------|-----------------------|
| Peak Knee valgus (°)            | 10.6 (7.9-13.3)  | 10.3 (7.5-13.1)  | .719 (.03)            |
| Peak foot abduction (°)         | 6.6 (4.2-9.0)    | 8.3 (6.1-10.5)   | .042 * (.26)          |
| Peak VGRF (BW)                  | 4.5 (4.1-5.0)    | 4.7 (4.3-5.2)    | .038 * (.14)          |
| Peak Rectus NEMG(%)             | 134 (102-148)    | 161 (140-183)    | .018 * (.53)          |
| Peak Medial Hamstrings NEMG(%)  | 115 (98-131)     | 134 (97-171)     | .245 (.36)            |
| Peak Lateral Hamstrings NEMG(%) | 106 (88-123)     | 131 (104-157)    | .056 (.40)            |
| Peak Gastrocnemius NEMG(%)      | 125 (113-137)    | 132 (105-158)    | .595 (.12)            |
| Knee Flexion at contact (°)     | 20.8 (17.9-23.7) | 19.4 (15.9-22.8) | .077 (.16)            |

* Statistically significant at α =0.05

Abbreviations: LSD = least significant difference, VGRF = vertical ground reaction force, BW = body weight, NEMG = normalized electromyography.

NEMG  activity  compared  to  males.  It  is  important  to recognize   that   comparison   of   NEMG muscle activity depends  on  the  normalization  method.  In  the  present study,  we  normalized  to  peak  EMG  activity  that  was exhibited  when  each  subject  performed  a  similar  task (landing  from  a  20  cm  platform).  Task  specific  EMG normalization  has  been  reported  to  be  superior  to  maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) for cyclical activities (Arendt-Nielsen and Sinkjaer, 1991; Kamen and Caldwell 1996) and to exhibit  less  variability  between  and  within subjects  (Burden  et  al.,  2003;  Yang  and  Winter,  1984). However, the lack of statistical significance in regards to the effect of gender on rectus femoris NEMG in the present study may be explained by the similarity of the task that  was  used  for  normalization  to  the  40  cm  landings. That  is,  females  may  have  landed  with  higher  rectus femoris  activity  from  the  20  cm  platform  compared  to males;  therefore,  the  normalization  method  would  have minimized  the  NEMG  gender  differences  during  the  40 cm landings.  A different normalization method may have resulted in significant gender differences relative to rectus femoris NEMG. Fagenbaum and Darling (2003) normalized to MVC and reported that females landed with higher quadriceps NEMG activity but did not provide details on the magnitude of the difference which precludes comparisons  with  the  findings  of  the  present  study.  Zeller  et  al. (2003) investigated gender differences during a single leg squat task and also normalized to MVC and reported that females  exhibited    47%  higher  mean  rectus  femoris NEMG than males.

The effect of fatigue  on  male  and  female  athletes who  participated  in  the  present  study  was  significant relative to three variables: peak VGRF, peak foot abduction,  and  peak  rectus  femoris  NEMG.  Although  the changes in VGRF were statistically significant, the clinical significance is questionable; males and females landed with  increased  forces  after  the  fatigue  protocol  by  0.13 BW (3.4% increase) and 0.34 BW (6.5% increase) respectively.  It  is  unclear  to  what  degree  an  increase  of  this magnitude  can  be  said  to  contribute  to  injury.    These findings,  however,  are  opposite  those  of  Madigan  and Pidcoe  (2003)  who  reported  that  fatigue  caused  a  12% decrease in peak VGRF in a group of men. The difference in results may be due to the methodology used by Madigan and Pidcoe (2003); they did not test female subjects that  contributed  most  of  the  peak  VGRF  increase  in  the present  study  and  they  fatigued  subjects  to  exhaustion. Another  difference  between  the  two  studies  is  that  the level  of  fatigue  was  not  measured  in  the  present  study; therefore  some  subjects  may  have  been  fatigued  by  the protocol more than other subjects. The VGRF increase in the current study suggests that athletes' ability to attenuate the impact of landing decreases after fatigue.

In  the  present  study,  subjects  in  the  post-fatigue condition  exhibited  a  significant  increase  in foot  abduction  from  6.6°  to  8.3°  The  role  of  foot  abduction  in  the occurrence of ACL injury is unclear, however some have suggested that it leads to increased knee valgus (Lin et al., 2001) and subsequent knee injury, although in the present study fatigue did not cause a significant increase in knee valgus.  Further  research  is  needed  to  clarify  the  role  of foot abduction on the mechanism of ACL injury.

Subjects  in  the  post-fatigue  condition  exhibited  a statistically significant increase of rectus femoris NEMG (F1,30 = 6.252, p = 0.018). This finding, however, does not mean  that  quadriceps  forces  were  higher  after  fatigue. Although the NEMG activity was higher, the ability of the muscle  fibers  to  develop  tension  decreases  with  fatigue. Dimitrova  and  Dimitrov  (2003)  critically  reviewed  the literature and reported that fatigue can cause an increase, decrease, or insignificant change on the NEMG amplitude during  dynamic  activities,  however,  most  studies  have shown that fatigue increases the amplitude of quadriceps EMG  activity  (Bonnard  et  al.,  1994;  Nummela  et  al., 1994;  Psek  and  Cafarelli,  1993;  Rodacki  et  al.,  2001; Viitasalo et al., 1993). The findings of the present study also  suggest  that  fatigue  causes  an  increase  in  muscle activity when measured by dynamic EMG.

Previous studies (Decker et al., 2003; Huston et al., 2001) have provided support to the straight knee landing theory by reporting that females land with their knees closer to extension than males. However, the findings of the  present  study  are  in  agreement  with  recent  studies (Fagenbaum and Darling, 2003; McLean et al., 2004) that do not support the straight knee landing theory. Males and females  landed  with  very  similar  knee  flexion  angles  at the  time  of  impact  (20.2°  vs.  20.0°,  F 1,30 =  0.003,  p  = 0.957).

The effectiveness  of  sports  injury  prevention  programs has been well documented both in epidemiological studies that showed a decrease of athletic injuries (Cerulli et al., 2001; Hewett et al., 1999; Myklebust et al., 2002) and in laboratory studies that showed a decrease in peak VGRF (Hewett et al., 1996).  However,  the  outcomes  of these  programs  may  improve  if  they  focus  on  variables that  have  been  identified  by  biomechanical  studies  as reflecting  genuine  differences  due  to  gender  or  fatigue and  have  been  proven  to  be  modifiable.  In  the  present study, females landed with greater peak knee valgus and peak  VGRF  than  males.  Fatigued  subjects  exhibited  increased peak VGRF and peak rectus femoris NEMG. The findings of the present study may be used to guide injury prevention  programs  designed  to  improve  the  landing technique of female athletes involved in sports. Control of these  variables  will  likely  reduce  landing  patterns  that result in high VGRF, increased stress on the passive structures, and subsequently, ligamentous injuries.

## Limitations

The present study was performed in a controlled laboratory  environment  where  subjects  knew  exactly  what  to expect.  Although  this  allows  accurate  comparison  between  groups,  it  does  not  closely  simulate  the  athletic environment. Most ACL injuries are non-contact in nature but there are additional unexpected factors during a game such as decreased friction of the floor surface, motion of the opponent, or miscalculation of ball motion that make landing  from  a  jump  more  unpredictable  and  dangerous than  in  a  laboratory  setting.  Moreover,  the  landing  task itself was not  identical to the  landing technique observed

in  the  athletic  field  since  we  instructed  subjects  to  keep their arms crossed across their chest and jump down from a  platform.  These  modifications  decrease  the generalizability of the findings to the athletic field.

All subjects were recreational athletes who participated  at  least  twice  per  week  in  a  variety  of  sports  that involved  jumping.  There  were  no  differences  between males and females in regards to hours of sports participation per week. However, this does not insure equal proficiency in drop landings; some subjects might have been more proficient than others in landing from a jump. We also did not objectively measure the effect of the fatigue protocol  on  the  volunteers'  musculoskeletal  system.  A more homogenous group of subjects such as recreational basketball or volleyball players would make the findings of  this  study  less  generalizable  but  would  increase  the internal validity of the study.

Finally,  a  limitation  inherent  of  this  study  as  well as of most sports biomechanics studies is that the values used  for  statistical  analysis  were  the  peak  values  of  the biomechanical  variables.  Peak  values  of  kinetic,  kinematic and NEMG variables would possess greater clinical significance if they were shown to occur at the first part of  the  landing  cycle  that  coincides  with  the  phase  the ACL is loaded (Pflum et al., 2004) and injuries are known to  occur (Boden et al., 2000; Griffin, 2001; Olsen et al., 2004).

## Conclusion

The  present  study  investigated  the  effect  of  gender  and fatigue on the biomechanical variables of landing from a jump. The findings show that females land with increased peak knee valgus and VGRF suggesting that the stress on the  inert  structures  can  become  excessive  and  lead  to traumatic  injury.  Fatigue  elicited  a  similar  response  in males  and  females,  resulting  in  significantly  increased peak VGRF, peak foot abduction, and peak rectus femoris NEMG activity.

Future  research  should  identify  where  within  the landing cycle peak values occur and more fully examine variables within the early phase of the cycle where injuries  are  thought  to  occur.  Consideration  should be given in  injury  prevention  programs  to  include  activities  that train female athletes to control excessive knee valgus and VGRF during landings from a jump.

## References

Arampatzis,  A.,  Morey-Klasping,  G.  and  Bruggemann,  G.  (2003)  The effect of falling height on muscle activity and foot motion during  landings. Journal  of  Electromyography  &amp;  Kinesiology 13, 533-544.

Arendt,  E.  and  Dick,  R.  (1995)  Knee  injury  patterns  among  men  and women in collegiate basketball and soccer. NCAA data and review  of  literature. American  Journal  of  Sports  Medicine 23, 694-701.

Arendt-Nielsen,  L.  and  Sinkjaer,  T.  (1991)  Quantification  of  human dynamic  muscle  fatigue  by  electromyography  and  kinematic profiles. Journal of Electromyography &amp; Kinesiology 1, 1-8.

Basmajian,  J.  and  DeLuca,  C.  (1985). Muscles  alive .  Baltimore,  MD, Williams and Wilkins.

Boden,  B.P.,  Dean,  G.S.,  Feagin,  J.A.,Jr.  and  Garrett,  W.E.,Jr.  (2000) Mechanisms  of  anterior  cruciate  ligament  injury. Orthopedics 23 , 573-578.

Bonnard, M., Sirin, A., Oddsson, L. and Thorstensson, A. (1994) Different strategies to compensate for the effects of fatigue revealed by  neuromuscular  adaptation  processes  in  humans. Neuroscience Letters 166, 101-105.

Bottini, E., Poggi, E., Luzuriaga, F. and Secin, F. (2000) Incidence and nature of the most common rugby injuries sustained in Argentina (1991-1997). British Journal of Sports Medicine 34, 94-97.

Bray,  J.  and  Maxwell,  S.  (1985). Multivariate  Analysis  of  Variance . Newbury Park, Sage Publications.

Burden,  A.,  Trew,  M.  and  Baltzopoulos,  V.  (2003).  Normalization  of gait  EMGs: a re-examination. Journal of Electromyography &amp; Kinesiology 13, 519-532.

Buchner,  A.,  Erdfelder,  E.  and  Faul,  F.  (1997)  How  to  use  G*Power. Available from URL: http://www.psycho.uniduessedorf.de/ aap/projects/gpower/how\_to\_use\_gpower.html

Cerulli, G., Benoit, D., Caraffa, A. and Ponteggia, F. (2001) Proprioceptive  training  and  prevention  of  anterior  cruciate  ligament  injuries  in  soccer. Journal  of  Orthopaedic  and  Sports  Physical Therapy 31, 655-660.

Chappell,  J.,  Herman,  D.,  Knight,  B.,  Kirkendall,  D.,  Garrett,  W.  and Yu, B. (2005) Effect of fatigue on knee kinetics and kinematics in  stop-jump  tasks. American  Journal  of  Sports  Medicine 33, 1022-1029.

Davis,  J.  and  Brewer,  J.  (1993)  Applied  physiology  of  female  soccer players. Sports Medicine 16, 180-189.

Decker, M., Torry, M., Wyland, D., Sterett, W. and Steadman, J. (2003) Gender differences in lower extremity kinematics, kinetics, and energy  absorption  during  landing. Clinical  Biomechanics 18, 662-669.

Delfico, A. and Garrett, W. (1998) Mechanisms of injury of the anterior cruciate ligament in soccer players. Clinics in Sports Medicine 17, 779-785.

Dimitrova, N. and Dimitrov, G. (2003) Interpretation of EMG changes with fatigue: facts, pitfalls, and fallacies. Journal of Electromyography &amp; Kinesiology 13, 13-36.

Dufec,  J.  and  Bates,  B.  (1991)  Biomechanical  factors  associated  with injury during landing in jump sports. Sports Medicine 12, 326337.

Fagenbaum, R. and Darling, W. (2003) Jump landing strategies in male and female college athletes and the implications of such strategies for anterior cruciate ligament injury. American Journal of Sports Medicine 31, 233-240.

Ferber, R., McClay Davis, I. and Williams III, D. (2003) Gender differences  in  lower  extremity  mechanics  during  running. Clinical Biomechanics 18, 350-7.

Ford,  K.,  Myer,  G.  and  Hewett,  T.  (2003)  Valgus  knee  motion  during landing  in  high  school  female  and  male  basketball  players. Medicine &amp; Science in Sports &amp;Exercise 35, 1745-1750.

Gabbett,  T.  (2000)  Incidence,  site,  and  nature  of  injuries  in  amateur rugby league over three consecutive seasons. British Journal of Sports Medicine 34, 98-103.

Gabbett, T. (2002), Incidence of injury in amateur rugby league sevens. British Journal of Sports Medicine 36, 23-26.

Gray,  J.,  Taunton,  J.,  McKenzie,  D.,  Clement,  D.,  McKonkey,  J.  and Davidson, R. (1985) A survey of injuries to the anterior cruciate ligament of the knee in female basketball players. International Journal of Sports Medicine 6, 314-316.

Griffin, L. (2001) Prevention of noncontact ACL injuries . Rosemont, IL, American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons.

Griffin,  L.,  Agel,  J.,  Albohm,  M.,  Arendt,  E.,  Dick,  R.,  Garrett,  W., Garrick,  J.,  Hewett,  T.,  Huston,  L.,  Ireland,  M.,  Johnson,  R., Kibler, B., Lephart, S., Lewis, J., Lindenfeld, T., Mandelbaum, B., Marchak, P., Teitz, C. and Wojtys, E. (2000) Noncontact anterior  cruciate  ligament  injuries:  risk  factors  and  prevention strategies. Journal  of  the  American  Academy  of  Orthopaedic Surgeons 8, 141-150.

Harmon,  K.  and  Ireland,  M.  (2000)  Gender  differences  in  noncontact anterior  cruciate  ligament  injuries. Clinics  in  Sports  Medicine 19, 287-302.

Hawkins,  R.,  Hulse,  M.,  Wilkinson,  C.,  Hodson,  A.  and  Gibson,  M. (2001) The association football medical research programme: an audit  of  injuries  in  professional  football. British  Journal  of Sports Medicine 35, 43-47.

Hermens,  H.,  Freriks,  B.,  Disselhorst-Klug,  C.  and  Rau,  G.  (2000) Development of recommendations for SEMG sensors and sensor  placement  procedures. Journal  of  Electromyography  &amp; Kinesiology 10, 361-374.

Hewett,  T.,  Lindenfeld,  T.,  Riccobene,  J.  and  Noyes,  F.  (1999)  The effect of neuromuscular training on the incidence of knee injury in  female  athletes. American  Journal  of  Sports  Medicine 27, 699-705.

Hewett, T., Myer, G. and Ford, K. (2001) Prevention of anterior cruciate ligament injuries. Current Womens Health Report 1, 218-224.

Hewett,  T.,  Myer,  G.  and  Ford,  K.  (2004)  Decrease  in  neuromuscular control  about  the  knee  with  maturation  in  female  athletes. Jounal of Bone &amp; Joint Surg 86-A, 1601-1608.

Hewett,  T.,  Myer,  G.,  Ford,  K.,  Heidt,  R.,  Colosimo,  A.,  McLean,  S., Van Den Bogert, A., Patterno, M. and Succop, P. (2005) Biomechanical measures of neuromuscular control and valgus loading of the knee predict anterior cruciate ligament injury risk in female athletes. American Journal of Sports Medicine 33, 492501.

Hewett,  T.,  Stroupe,  A.,  Nance,  T.  and  Noyes,  F.  (1996)  Plyometric training  in  female  athletes:  decreased  impact  forces  and  increased  hamstring  torques. American  Journal  of  Sports  Medicine 24, 765-773.

Horita,  T.,  Komi,  P.,  Nicol,  C.  and  Kyrolainen,  H.  (1999)  Effect  of exhausting stretch-shortening cycle exercise on the time courseof mechanical behaviour in the drop jump: possible role of muscle damage. European Journal of Applied Physiology 79, 160-167.

Huston, L. and Wojtys, E. (1996) Neuromuscular performance characteristics  in  elite  female  athletes. American  Journal  of  Sports Medicine 24, 427-436.

Huston,  L.J.,  Vibert,  B.,  Ashton-Miller,  J.A.  and  Wojtys,  E.M.  (2001) Gender  differences  in  knee  angle  when  landing  from  a  dropjump. American Journal of Knee Surgery 14, 215-219.

Hutchinson,  M.R.  and  Ireland,  M.L.  (1995)  Knee  injuries  in  female athletes. Sports Medicine 19, 288-302.

Kamen, G. and Caldwell, G. (1996) Physiology and interpretation of the electromyogram. Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology 13, 366384.

Kernozek, T., Torry, M., Van Hoof, H. and Cowley, H. (2005) Gender differences  in  frontal  and  sagittal  plane  biomechanics  during drop  landings. Medicine  &amp;  Science  in  Sports  &amp;  Exercise 37, 1003-1012.

Kersey, R. and Rowan, L. (1983) Injury account during the 1980 NCAA wrestling championships. American  Journal of Sports Medicine 11, 147-151.

Kirialanis,  P.,  Malliou,  P.,  Beneka,  A.  and  Giannakopoulos,  K.  (2003) Occurence of acute lower limb injuries in artistic gymnasts in relation  to  event  and  exercise  phase. British  Journal  of  Sports Medicine 37, 137-139.

Kirkendall,  D.  and  Garrett,  W.  (2000)  The  anterior  cruciate  ligament enigma: injury mechanisms and prevention. Clinical Orthopaedics &amp; Related Research 372, 64-68.

Lin,  C.J.,  Lai,  K.A.,  Chou,  Y.L.  and  Ho,  C.S.  (2001)  The  effect  of changing the foot progression angle on the knee adduction moment in normal teenagers. Gait &amp; Posture 14, 85-91.

Madigan,  M.  and  Pidcoe,  P.  (2003)  Changes  in  landing  biomechanics during a fatiguing landing activity. Journal of  Electromyography &amp; Kinesiology 13, 491-498.

Matava, M.J., Freehill, A.K., Grutzner, S. and Shannon, W. (2002) Limb dominance as a potential etiologic factor in noncontact anterior cruciate ligament tears. American Journal of Knee Surgery 15, 11-16.

McLean, S., Huang, X., Su, A. and Van Den Bogert, A. (2004) Sagittal plane biomechanics cannot injure the ACL during sidestep cutting. Clinical Biomechanics 19, 828-838.

Messina, D., Farney, W. and DeLee, J. (1999) The incidence of injury in Texas  high  school  basketball. American  Journal  of  Sports Medicine 27, 294-299.

Miyasaka, K., Daniel, D. and Stone, M. (1991) The incidence of knee ligament injuries in the general population. American Journal of Knee Surgery 4 , 3-8.

Motion Analysis (2003) EvaRT 4.0 . Santa Rosa, CA, Motion Analysis. Myklebust, G., Engebretsen, L., Braekken, I., Skjolberg, A., Olsen, O. and Bahr, R. (2002) Prevention of anterior cruciate ligament injuries in female team handball players: a prospective intervention  study  over  three  seasons. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine 13, 71-78.

Nummela,  A.,  Rusko,  H.  and  Mero,  A.  (1994)  EMG  activities  and ground reaction forces during fatigued and nonfatigued sprinting. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 26, 605-609.

Olsen,  O.,  Myklebust,  G.,  Engebretsen,  L.  and  Bahr,  R.  (2004)  Injury mechanisms  for  anterior  cruciate  ligament  injuries  in  team handball. American Journal of Sports Medicine 32, 1002-1012.

Pedowitz,  R.A.,  O'Connor,  J.  and  Akeson,  W.  (2003) Daniel's  knee injuries: Ligament and cartilage structure, function, injury and repair . Philadelphia, Lippincott, Williams &amp; Wilkins.

Pflum,  M.,  Shelburne,  K.,  Torry,  M.,  Decker,  M.  J.  and  Pandy,  M. (2004) Model prediction of anterior cruciate ligament force during drop-landings. Medicine &amp; Science in Sports &amp; Exercise 36, 1949-1958.

Portney,  L.  and  Watkins,  M.  (2000) Foundations of clinical  research: applications to practice . Upper Saddle River, Prentice-Hall.

Powell, J. and Barber-Foss, K. (2000) Sex-related injury patterns among selected high school sports. American Journal of Sports Medicine 28, 385-391.

Psek,  J.  and  Cafarelli,  E.  (1993).  Behavior  of  coactive  muscles  during fatigue. Journal of Applied Physiology 74 : 170-175.

Rahnama, N., Reilly, T. and Lees, A. (2002) Injury risk associated with playing  actions  during  competitive  soccer. British  Journal  of Sports Medicine 36, 354-359.

Richards, J. (2002) Orthotrak 5.0 . Santa Rosa, CA, Motion Analysis.

Rodacki,  Fowler  AL  and  Ne,  B.  (2001)  Multi-segment  coordination: fatigue  effects. Medicine  &amp;  Science  in  Sports  &amp;  Exercise 33, 1157-1167.

Rodacki, A., Fowler, N. and Bennett, S. (2002) Vertical jump coordination: fatigue effects. Medicine &amp; Science in Sports &amp; Exercise 34, 105-116.

Rozzi, S., Lephart, S. and Fu, F. (1999a) Effects of muscular fatigue on knee joint laxity and neuromuscular characteristics of male and female athletes. Journal of Athletic Training 34, 106-114.

Rozzi, S., Lephart, S., Gear, W. and Fu, F. (1999b) Knee joint laxity and neuromuscular  characteristics  of  male  and  female  soccer  and basketball  players. American  Journal  of  Sports  Medicine 27, 312-319.

Skurvydas,  A.,  Dudodiene,  V.,  Kalvenas,  A.  and  Zuoza,  A.  (2002) Skeletal  muscle  fatigue  in  long  distance  runners,  sprinters  and untrained men after repeated drop jumps performed at maximal intensity. Scandinavian  Journal  of  Medicine  &amp;  Science  in Sports 12, 34-39.

Skurvydas, A., Jaskaninas, J. and Zachovajevas, P. (2000). Changes in height  of  jump,  maximal  voluntary  contraction  force  and  low frequency  fatigue  after  100  intermittent  or  continuous  jumps with maximal intensity. Acta Physiologica Scandinavia 169, 5562.

Stevens, J. (2002). Applied multivariate statistics for the social sciences . Mahwan, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Stevenson, H., Webster, J., Johnson, R. and Beynnon, B. (1998) Gender differences in knee injury epidemiology among competitive alpine ski racers. The Iowa Orthopaedic Journal 18, 64-66.

Svantesson, U., Osterberg, U., Thomee, R., Peeters, M. and Grimby, G. (1998)  Fatigue  during  repeated  eccentric-concentric  and  pure concentric  muscle  actions  of  the  plantar  flexors. Clinical  Biomechanics 13, 336-343.

Tillman, M.D., Smith, K.R., Bauer, J.A., Cauraugh, J.H., Falsetti, A.B. and  Pattishall,  J.L.  (2002).  Differences  in  three  intercondylar notch geometry indices between males and females: a cadaver study. Knee 9, 41-46.

Viitasalo, J., Salo, A. and Lahtinen, J. (1998) Neuromuscular functioning  of  athletes  and  non-athletes  in  the  drop  jump. European Journal of Applied Physiology 78, 432-440.

Viitasalo, J.T., Hamalainen, K., Mononen, H.V., Salo, A. and Lahtinen, J.  (1993)  Biomechanical  effects  of  fatigue  during  continuous hurdle jumping. Journal of Sports Sciences 11, 503-509.

Yang, J. and Winter, D. (1984) Electromyographic amplitude normalization methods: improving their sensitivity as diagnostic tools in gait  analysis. Archives  of  Physical  Medicine  &amp;  Rehabilitation 65, 517-521.

Zeller,  B.,  McCrory,  J.,  Kibler,  B.  and  Uhl,  T.  (2003)  Differences  in kinematics  and  electromyographic  activity  between  men  and women  during  the  single-legged  squat. American  Journal  of Sports Medicine 31, 449-456.

## Key points

- Female  athletes  landed  with  increased  knee  valgus and VGRF which may predispose them to ACL injury.
- Fatigue  elicited  a  similar  response  in  male  and  female athletes.
- The  effectiveness  of  sports  injury  prevention  programs may improve by focusing on teaching females to land softer and with less knee valgus.

## AUTHORS BIOGRAPHY

<!-- image -->

## Evangelos PAPPAS Employment

Assistant Professor, Division of Physical Therapy, Long Island University, Brooklyn, NY

## Degrees

PT, PhD

## Research interests

Biomechanics, athletic injuries, motion analysis.

E-mail: evangelos.pappas@liu.edu

## Ali SHEIKHZADEH Employment

Research Assistant Professor, Program in Ergonomics and Biomechanics, New York University, New York, NY

## Degrees

PhD

## Research interests

Occupational injuries, electromyography.

E-mail: as54@nyu.edu

## Marshall HAGINS

## Employment

Associate Professor, Division of Physical Therapy, Long Island University, Brooklyn, NY

## Degrees

PT, PhD

## Research interests

Biomechanics, breathing, dance medicine

E-mail: mhagins@liu.edu

## Margareta NORDIN

## Employment

Research Professor, Program in Ergonomics and Biomechanics, New York University, New York, NY

## Degrees

PT, Dr.Med.Sci.

Research interests

Occupational injuries, biomechanics

E-mail: margareta.nordin@nyu.edu

## GLYPH&lt;c=13,font=/BMLGAK+Wingdings-Regular&gt; Evangelos Pappas

Division  of  Physical  Therapy,  Long  Island  University,  Brooklyn, NY,11201, USA