<!-- image -->

## SYSTEMATIC REVIEW

## THE INFLUENCE OF EXTRINSIC FACTORS ON KNEE BIOMECHANICS DURING CYCLING: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

Therese E. Johnston, PT, PhD, MBA 1

Tiara A. Baskins, DPT 1 Rachael V. Koppel, DPT 1 Samuel A. Oliver, DPT 1 Donald J. Stieber, DPT 1 Lisa T. Hoglund, PT, PhD, OCS 1

## ABSTRACT

Background: The knee is susceptible to injury during cycling due to the repetitive nature of the activity while generating torque on the pedal. Knee pain is the most common overuse related injury reported by cyclists, and intrinsic and extrinsic factors can contribute to the development of knee pain.

Purpose: Due to the potential for various knee injuries, this purpose of this systematic review of the literature was to determine the association between biomechanical factors and knee injury risk in cyclists.

Study Design: Systematic review of the literature

Methods: Literature searches were performed using CINAHL, Ovid, PubMed, Scopus and SPORTDiscus. Quality of studies was assessed using the Downs and Black Scale for non-randomized trials.

Results: Fourteen papers were identified that met inclusion and exclusion criteria. Only four studies included cyclists with knee pain. Studies were small with sample sizes ranging from 9-24 participants, and were of low to moderate quality. Biomechanical factors that may impact knee pain include cadence, power output, crank length, saddle fore/ aft position, saddle height, and foot position. Changing these factors may lead to differing effects for cyclists who experience knee pain based on specific anatomical location.

Conclusion: Changes in cycling parameters or positioning on the bicycle can impact movement, forces, and muscle activity around the knee. While studies show differences across some of the extrinsic factors included in this review, there is a lack of direct association between parameters/positioning on the cycle and knee injury risk due to the limited studies examining cyclists with and without pain or injury. The results of this review can provide guidance to professionals treating cyclists with knee pain, but more research is needed.

## Level of Evidence: 3a

Key Words: Biomechanics, cycling, knee injury, knee pain, overuse

## CORRESPONDING AUTHOR

1  Department of Physical Therapy, Jefferson College of Health Professions, Philadelphia, PA, USA

Therese E. Johnston, PT, PhD, MBA Department of Physical Therapy, Jefferson College of Health Professions Jefferson (Philadelphia University + Thomas Jefferson University) 901 Walnut Street, Room 515, Philadelphia, PA 19107 T 215-503-6033, F 215-503-3499 E-mail: therese.johnston@jefferson.edu

## INTRODUCTION

With  the  increase  in  recreational  and  competitive cycling, cyclists are experiencing more overuse injuries related to repetitive loading. 1  Both intrinsic and extrinsic factors contribute to injury. 1  Intrinsic factors are inherent to the cyclist and include fitness level as well as anatomical alignment of the lower extremities. 1   Extrinsic  factors  are  generally  associated  with  factors  external  to  the  cyclist  such  as equipment, riding technique, and training. 1

The  knee  is  the  most  common  joint  impacted  by cycling  overuse  injuries  in  recreational  and  professional cyclists. 1,2   Knee pain is reported to affect 40-60% of recreational cyclists and 36-62% of professional  cyclists. 1,3,4 Anterior  knee  pain  is  the  most common, which is likely due to patellofemoral pain, patellar  tendinopathy,  or  quadriceps  tendinopathy. 1,3-5   Factors  that  may  cause  anterior  knee  pain include  increased  pressure  due  to  hill  climbing, heavy workloads, increased training, altered patellar tracking, or by a combination of factors. 1,3,4  Many risk  factors  can  contribute  to  the  problem  such as  altered  patellar  position,  decreased  flexibility, increased quadriceps (Q) angle, muscle imbalances, and  various  limb  torsional  and  foot  deformities. 1,6 In a review article, Johnston reported that cycling cadence  and  workload  impact  moments  around the  knee,  which  may  contribute  to  knee  injury  at higher effort levels. 7   Increasing knee flexion angle can  increase  forces  impacting  the  knee 8   while  cocontraction  of  the  knee  flexors  and  extensors  can decrease them. 9  Thus the interaction of these variables as well as power output and cycling duration may be important in understanding cyclists who are at greater risk of injury due to loading.

Several knee structures are potentially at risk for overuse injury with cycling due to intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Patellofemoral pain (PFP) is one of the most common causes of knee pain in cyclists,  resulting in anterior knee pain. 5  Female gender is a risk factor  for  PFP , 10   and  PFP  is  more  common  in  female cyclists. 11  An additional risk factor is reduced quadriceps strength, 10  which may cause the greatest prevalence of PFP during preseason training in cyclists. 4 Additional  associated  factors  with  PFP  in  cyclists include  excessive  varus  knee  moments  during  the power  stroke, 12 excessive  valgus  knee  alignment, 5

repetitive loading of the patella, 13  weak gluteal muscles, 5 increased  Q  angles, 11 excessive  patellar  lateral tilt, 5  and excessive foot pronation. 5  Patellar and quadriceps  tendinopathies  are  additional  causes  of anterior knee pain in cyclists,  5  which are caused by chronic repetitive overload of tendons during quadriceps contractions. 14,15  Iliotibial band (ITB) syndrome is  the  most  common  cause  of  lateral  knee  pain  in cyclists. 2  Proposed  mechanisms  for  ITB  syndrome are compression of fat beneath the ITB at the lateral femoral epicondyle or friction of the ITB as it moves across the lateral femoral epicondyle during repetitive knee flexion and extension. 2,11,16  When the knee reaches  20-30 ° of  flexion,  the  ITB  passes  over  the lateral femoral epicondyle, 17,18  creating an impingement zone for fat and an adventitial bursa. 2,5,11  ITB syndrome is likely caused by increased tibial internal rotation, ITB tightness, inward pointing of toes on  the  pedals,  increased  hip  adduction,  a  bicycle saddle position that is too high, and rapid increase in mileage. 1,2,5,16,19  Medial knee injuries seen in cyclists include medial collateral ligament bursitis, plica syndrome, pes anserine syndrome and medial meniscus tear. 2  Plica syndrome is characterized by pain, snapping or clicking sensations as inflamed remnants of synovial tissue impinge against the anterior medial femoral condyle as the knee flexes and extends. 2,20 Medial  meniscus  tear  is  least  likely  to  occur  in cyclists, but can be symptomatic when rotating the leg to release the shoe from the pedal. 2  The posterior knee is the least commonly injured and may be attributed to biceps femoris tendinopathy presenting posterolaterally. 2  The etiology of biceps femoris tendinopathy is chronic overload of the hamstring muscles and tendons, and may be due to tight hamstrings or an excessively high saddle. 21

Due to the potential for various knee injuries, this purpose of this systematic review of the literature was to determine the association between biomechanical factors  and  knee  injury  risk  in  cyclists.  T o  accomplish this goal, biomechanical studies that examined extrinsic factors including kinematics, kinetics, and/ or muscle activity under various cycling conditions and cycle component settings were included.

## METHODS

Search  Strategy :  An  initial  literature  search  was performed in August of 2015 using CINAHL, Ovid,

PubMed,  Scopus  &amp;  SPORTDiscus  databases.  Key terms  used  in  the  search  included  knee  injuries, knee pain, cycling, cyclist, biomechanics, and overuse. All  keywords  were  compiled  and  searched using  AND/OR  to  further  refine  the  search.  Key words were used to screen titles that best addressed the  research  question.  A  second  search  using  the same search terms and databases was performed in March of 2017 to locate additional articles published between August of 2015 and March of 2017.

Selection Criteria : Of the 46 articles selected, abstracts were  screened  based  on  the  inclusion  criteria  of evaluating extrinsic biomechanical factors associated with the knee in cyclists. Studies were required to include measurement of one or more of the following at the knee during cycling: kinematics, kinetics, and muscle activity. Studies were excluded if they were not published in English, focused on injury in other areas of the body, or evaluated traumatic injury. The studies included were comparison or cross sectional.

Data  Collection :  Five  reviewers  evaluated  the  final studies  after  applying  inclusion/exclusion  criteria from full text articles. Each study was read and evaluated by two reviewers. Articles were graded using the  Downs &amp; Black scale for assessment of methodological quality and risk of bias. 22  The Downs &amp; Black scale is considered a valid and reliable checklist  for  non-randomized  studies  and  was  deemed appropriate due to the observational nature of the studies. 22,23   Data  extracted  from  articles  included population, variables measured, results, and conclusions (Table 1).

## RESULTS

Study  Selection: Of  the  72  studies  found  across  the two  searches,  14  were  deemed  eligible  based  on inclusion  criteria  (Figure  1).  Studies  were  overall small with sample sizes ranging from 9-24 participants, with a total of 239 participants across studies.

Study  Characteristics: Studies  that  reported  gender included more male than female participants. Studies included adults aged 19 to over 50 years. Eleven studies  were  within-participant  designs  with  one study  including  participants  with  knee  pain 24   and 10 including participants without injury. 12,25-33  Three studies 34-36   compared participants with and without pain.  Participants  were  described  as  competitive cyclists, 12,28,29 amateur  cyclists, 32 experienced 24-26 or trained cyclists, 27 recreational cyclists, 30,31,34   noncyclists, 33,36  or cyclists without further description. 35

Assessment  of  Included  Studies: Ten  of  the  14  studies  had  sample  sizes  of  less  than  20  participants. Downs and Black scores ranged from 3 to 13 (out of 27) with a median score of 10 (Table 1). Study quality  was  categorized  according to percentage of the possible Downs and Black score as follows: low (≤ 33.3%), moderate (33.4% - 66.7%), and high quality (≥ 66.8%). 23  Therefore, the included studies were of low to moderate quality using this scale. 23  No blinding of assessors occurred in any comparison studies.

Methodology  and  Outcomes  Measured: Methodology and outcomes measured varied across studies (Table 1).  Knee  kinematics  with  or  without  assessment of other joints were main outcomes assessed in 10 studies using 2D or 3D motion capture. 24,28-36  Knee kinematics  were  primarily  measured  in  the  sagittal plane, but three studies also measured kinematics in the coronal plane. 24,30,36  Knee kinetics with or without assessment of other joints were main outcome  measures  in  12  studies  with  different  measures examined, including joint power, 25-27  muscle/ joint  moments, 12,27,29,30,34,36   patellofemoral  compressive forces, 28,33,34 tibiofemoral compressive and shear forces, 28,33,34  pedal forces/pedal force effectiveness, 29,31,33,34,36   and  crank  torque. 32   Moments around the  knee  were  primarily  measured  in  the  sagittal plane,  but  four  studies  also  examined  moments in  the  coronal  plane. 12,24,30,36   T wo  studies  measured muscle activity around the knee using electromyography (EMG), 12,35  and one study assessed pain. 36

Experimental Conditions : Studies manipulated several conditions to examine effects at the knee, including cadence, 25,27,30 power output, 26,30,32 crank length, 25,27,32 saddle fore/aft position, 28  saddle height, 29,31,33,34 and foot position. 12,36  Participants used their own cycles mounted on a trainer, 24,28,35   a  type  of  cycle  ergometer, 12,25-27,29,30,32-34,36 or a standard cycle on a trainer. 31

Cadence and Power Effects: Increasing cadence led to increased knee range of motion (ROM), 27  increased anterior  and  vertical  pedal  reaction  forces, 30   and increased knee flexion moments. 30 As cycling power output increased, greater knee extension and

## Table 1. Study characteristics, results, and Downs and Black scores.

Figure 1. PRISMA Flow Diagram.

<!-- image -->

abduction  moments  were  seen. 30   Related  to  these increases,  relative  knee  flexion  power  increased while  extension  decreased  with  increasing  power output. 26   Interestingly,  hip  extension  power  was reported to be dominant in power production, but relative  hip  extension  power  did  not  change  with increased  power  output. 26   Increased  knee  vertical and  medial  pedal  reaction  forces  were  seen  with increasing power output. 30

Bicycle  Setting  Effects: In  two  studies,  Barratt  et  al. examined power 25,27   and  muscle  moments 27   at  five different crank lengths at a cadence of 120 rpm and a  cadence  optimized  to  provide  maximum  power. They reported  that  crank  length  had  no  effect  on power at joints, except for greater power at the shortest crank length of 150mm compared to the longest of  190mm at 120 rpm; 25  thus showing a combined effect  of  crank  and  cadence. 25   In  another  study, knee  extension  moments  and  power  decreased, and hip extension power increased as crank length increased. 27 In contrast, Ferrer-Roca et al. 32  reported increased  crank  length  led  to  increased  torque around joints; however the range of crank lengths used was much smaller (10 mm) 32  than in Barratt et al. (40 mm). 25,27

Bini et al. 28  manipulated saddle fore/aft position and reported  increased  knee  flexion  angles  of  22-36% and decreased tibiofemoral anterior shear forces of 26% with the saddle  at  the  most  forward  position compared to the most backward position. No differences were seen across positions in patellofemoral

and tibiofemoral  compressive  forces. 28   Three  studies  examined  various  saddle  heights, 29,33,34 one  of which  being  a  height  considered  optimal,  which was defined as the position that achieved 25-30 ° of knee  flexion  at  bottom  dead  center. 29 Bini  et  al. 34 examined  four  different  saddle  heights  and  found increased tibiofemoral anterior shear forces at high and  optimal  compared  to  low  saddle  height 34   and large differences in knee angle across conditions in recreational cyclists. There were no differences for patellofemoral  or  tibiofemoral  compressive  forces across seat heights and no differences seen between cyclists with and without knee pain. 34  In competitive cyclists, they found increased force effectiveness for road cyclists at optimal saddle height, and increased mean knee flexion angles at low and preferred compared  to  high  and  optimal  saddle  heights  for  road cyclists  and  triathletes. 29 Interestingly,  Farrell  et al. 31  reported that while saddle height was set in the optimal position statically, knee flexion seen while cycling was greater due to lateral movement of the pelvis in recreational cyclists, which may decrease risk of ITB impingement. 31  Finally, T amborindeguy and Bini 33  set saddle height based on cyclists' anthropometrics  and  found  no  differences  in  peak  tibiofemoral  compressive/anterior  shear  components across three slightly different saddle heights based on percentages of floor-greater trochanter heights of 97%, 100%, and 103%.

Two  studies  examined  effects  of  foot  position  on knee  forces.  For  participants  with  osteoarthritis (OA) with and without pain, decreased knee adduction angles of 2.7 ° and 3.2 ° were seen with wedges placed  to  increase  the  toe-in  angle  by  5 ° and  10 ° , respectively;  yet  no  changes  were  seen  in  knee abduction  moments  and  vertical  pedal  reaction forces increased. 36  Ankle eversion of 10 ° was found to decrease knee peak varus moments by 55% and peak internal axial moments by 53% and to increase activation ratio of the vastus medialis to vastus lateralis  (r  =  -0.23). 12   Thus  eversion  of  the  foot  may decrease risks for PFP . 12

Muscle Temporal Activation and Kinematics: Two studies  compared  temporal  muscle  activation  patterns and  kinematics  between  cyclists  with  and  without  pain  without  manipulating  cycling  conditions. Dieter et al. 35  reported differences in muscle activity patterns for cyclists with and without PFP . In cyclists with PFP , offset of the vastus medialis occurred 22 ± 23 ms sooner than the vastus lateralis, onset of the biceps  femoris  occurred  111  ±  78  ms  sooner  than the  semitendinosus,  and  the  semitendinosus  had overall  decreased  activation  compared  to  cyclists without pain. 35  Bailey et al. 24  reported differences in knee and ankle angular positions between cyclists with a history of anterior knee pain or patellar tendinitis and uninjured cyclists. The previously injured group  had  lower  peak  knee  adduction  angles  and increased ankle dorsiflexion angles. No differences were found for peak knee flexion angles. 24

## DISCUSSION

Cycling  parameters  (i.e.,  cadence  and  power  output) and bicycle fit settings have differing effects on kinematics, kinetics, and muscle activity around the knee. Few studies compared cyclists with and without knee pain, so injury risk can only be surmised based on the results of biomechanical studies that examine cyclists without injury or pain. There is also a lack of longitudinal studies to assess the effects of altering parameters on knee injury and pain. Thus, causation cannot be determined.

Studies examining cycling kinetics indicate that various stresses are imparted on the knee based on a variety of kinetic variables. Vertical and anterior pedal reaction  forces  increase  at  higher  cadences, 30 and vertical and medial pedal reaction forces increase at higher power outputs. 30  Tibiofemoral peak anterior shear  forces  were  found  to  be  increased  at  higher saddle heights, 34  and ankle inversion increased peak vertical forces. 12  These findings are in partial agreement with an earlier study by Ericson and Nisell, 37 which  reported  that  higher  saddle  heights  significantly increased tibiofemoral anterior shear forces, but decreased tibiofemoral compressive forces. The findings  of  the  studies  in  this  systematic  review and  earlier  studies  have  implications  for  loading of  the  knee  joint  during  cycling  and  suggest  that lower  cadences,  lower  workloads,  a  higher  saddle height,  and  foot  eversion  might  be  preferred  for cyclists with knee pain due to tibiofemoral compressive joint loading, such as with medial tibiofemoral OA. In contrast, cyclists with anterior cruciate ligament injury or reconstruction may benefit from a

lower saddle height and lower cadences. 30,34,37  However, force effectiveness, a measure of force output in  relation  to  angle  of  force  application,  may  be decreased with these settings, 29  and thus the effects of  combining  these  conditions  is  unknown.  The effect of crank length due to loading is more difficult to interpret as a shorter crank length at a higher cadence  increases  power  output, 25   yet  increased crank lengths may shift more of the power production from the knee extensors to the hip extensors. 27 When comparing the moments around the knee to other  activities  such  as  walking,  jogging,  and  stair climbing,  the  extension  and  flexion  moments  are generally smaller when cycling at 120 Watts. At 240 Watts, the loads were similar to the other activities. 38 Knee injuries are the most commonly reported injuries in cyclists, thus it may be the combined effects of workload, cadence, and positioning on the cycle that contribute to injury.

Shear  forces  are  another  concern  in  cyclists,  particularly  possible  injury  to  the  anterior  cruciate ligament (ACL) or after an ACL reconstruction. Tibiofemoral anterior shear forces may decrease with a more forward 28  or lower saddle position, 34  decreasing  potential  strain  on  the  ACL.  However,  studies reported low in vivo ACL strain 39  and low anterior tibiofemoral shear force 37  during cycling. Fleming et al. 39  reported that strain on the ACL during cycling was  approximately  1.7%,  and  did  not  change  significantly with alteration of cadence or power level. Strain on the ACL during cycling was low compared to  3.6% while squatting and 2.8% while extending the  knee  from  flexion. 39 Strong  contraction  of  the hamstrings  during  the  second  half  of  the  power phase may minimize ACL strain. 40  Posterior pull of the  hamstrings  on  the  tibia  when  the  crank  angle is 180° from top dead center may limit ACL strain as  the  knee  approaches  its  least  flexed  position  of 37°, 41   an  angle  which is within the range of greatest  ACL  strain  during  activities,  0°  -  50°  flexion. 42 While shear forces on the ACL during cycling appear to be low, more research is needed to examine shear forces on the posterior cruciate ligament and patella during cycling. Thus, cyclists with anterior cruciate ligament injury or reconstruction may benefit from a lower saddle height or more forward saddle position. 28,34  as well as a lower cadence. 30

Medial and lateral regions of the knee are also susceptible to injury. Coronal plane forces are affected by foot position, with eversion lowering peak varus and  internal  axial  moments  and  increasing  vastus medialis  activation  compared  to  inversion. 12   For people  with  medial  knee  OA,  rotating  the  shank to increase toe-in angle reduced peak knee adduction angles, with no impact on peak knee abduction moments. 36   Gardner  et  al. 36   hypothesized  that  an alignment  change  with  increased  toe-in  foot  position would decrease the frontal plane moment arm of  the  pedal  reaction  force,  which  would  decrease knee  abduction  moments.  As  competitive  cyclists and people with knee OA differ in knee alignment, findings may be specific to these populations. One study examined the impact of saddle height on ITB syndrome and reported that a lower saddle height that  increased  minimum  knee  flexion  angle  to greater  than  30 ° kept  the  ITB  out  of  the  impingement zone. 31  For cyclists at risk for ITB pain, a lower seat height may also be desirable by reducing compensatory lateral pelvic motion 31  that can increase stress to the ITB. Overall, more research is needed to  better  understand  the  effects  of  cycling  on  the medial and lateral regions of the knee.

Few studies have examined PFP in cyclists specifically,  which  is  surprising  due  to  the  prevalence  of anterior knee pain in cyclists. 2  One study reported differences  in  muscle  activation  between  cyclists with  and  without  PFP . 35   Although  no  differences were found between groups for vastus medialis onset times,  the  slower  contraction  offset  time  of  vastus lateralis relative to vastus medialis in the PFP cyclist group  may  be  associated  with  lateral  patellar  maltracking. 35  These findings are consistent with a systematic review that did not find a difference in vastus medialis and vastus lateralis contraction onset in persons with PFP , but reported significant variability in muscle activation ratio. 43 Dieter et al. 35  also reported earlier contraction onset and later offset time of the biceps femoris relative to the semitendinosus in the PFP  group  compared  to  controls. 35   These  changes may result in increased tibial external rotation, with a  resultant  increase  in  the  dynamic  Q  angle  and potentially increased lateral patellofemoral joint stress. 44,45   As  the  hamstrings are active longer than the  quadriceps  during  cycling, 21   altered  hamstring

activation  may  be  more  critical  to  development  of PFP in  cyclists  compared  to  vasti  activation.  However,  it  is  unknown  if  altered  muscle  activation  is compensatory to or a cause of PFP . Altered coronal plane knee position may be associated with PFP as reduced knee adduction angles, that is, a more valgus position, are seen in cyclists with anterior knee pain or patellar tendonitis. 24  Studies in this systematic review that examined the impact of saddle position  on  patellofemoral  compressive  forces  did  not find significant differences. 28,33 In contrast, an earlier study  by  Ericson  and  Nisell 8 reported  that  a  lower saddle  increased  patellofemoral  joint  compressive forces. Although increased knee flexion from a lower saddle position would increase patellofemoral joint reaction force, 46   patellofemoral joint cartilage stress does  not  increase  linearly  with  increasing  knee flexion from 0° to 90°. 47  Patellofemoral joint stress increases to a lesser degree than patellofemoral joint reaction  force  with  increasing  knee  flexion  due  to increased patellofemoral joint contact surface area. 47 Tamborindeguy and Bini 33   found  the  highest  patellofemoral compressive force occurred with the knee at approximately 75°-80°. Thus, patellofemoral joint stress may be minimized during cycling by greater patellofemoral joint contact area at knee joint positions which have high patellofemoral joint reaction forces. 47   PFP in cyclists may not be related to high joint stress, but rather secondary to frequent patellofemoral joint loading from repetitive knee extension. This repetitive loading could cause supraphysiologic loading of osseous and non-osseous structures potentially causing loss of tissue homeostasis and PFP . 48,49 More research is needed to understand patellofemoral compressive and shear forces and how they are associated with risk of injury.

In the articles in this systemic review, no issues specific  to  the  posterior  knee  were  discussed.  Elmer et  al. 26   reported that knee flexion power increased relative  to  extension  power  as  overall  power  output  increased, 26   which  may  have  implications  for biceps femoris tendinopathy. 2  Interestingly, Dieter et al. 35  found that biceps femoris muscle activation occurred prior  to  semitendinosus  onset  in  cyclists with  PFP ,  unlike  those  without  this  anterior  pain condition.  More  research  is  needed  on  posterior knee pain in cyclists.

There  are  several  limitations  of  this  systematic review. Studies differed considerably in methodology,  making  qualitative  or  quantitative  comparisons challenging. It is also difficult to make strong recommendations as far as the amount of change needed to decrease injury risk as studies vary in the magnitude  of  changes  in  cycling  parameters  and bicycle  settings.  Bini  et  al. 34 reported  that  even  a 5% difference in saddle height can affect knee joint kinematics  by  35%  and  joint  moments  by  16%; 34 yet it is unknown how these differences then translate into injury risk. There is also the lack of direct association between parameters/positioning on the cycle and injury due to limited studies examining cyclists with and without pain or injury and a lack of  longitudinal  studies.  More  research  is  needed to  establish  clear  links  and  recommendations  by manipulating parameters based on the available literature and knowledge of biomechanics impacting specific areas of the knee. Longer term effects on pain,  performance,  and  participation  should  then be assessed. Another limitation is the inclusion of 2D measurements in some studies. 2D data capture can be misleading as movement outside of the sagittal plane impacts how each joint is visualized on a 2D image. In addition, 3D kinetic measurements are  needed  to  fully  understand  the  effects  on  the knee in all three planes.

## CONCLUSIONS

The results of this systematic review indicate that changes in cycling parameters or positioning on the bicycle  can  impact  movement, forces, and muscle activity around the knee. While studies showed differences across some of the extrinsic factors, there is a lack of direct association between parameters/ positioning  on  the  cycle  and  knee  injury.  Despite the lack of this clear association, the results of this systematic review can provide guidance to professionals  treating  cyclists  with  knee  pain.  The  literature  provides  important  information  about  how biomechanical factors and positioning on the bicycle can increase or decrease stress in specific areas of the knee joint. Further research is needed with larger samples of cyclists with including those without knee pain to better understand direct relationships between these variables and knee pain during cycling.

## REFERENCES

1.  Wanich T, Hodgkins C, Columbier JA et al. Cycling injuries of the lower extremity. J Am Acad Orthop Surg . 2007;15:748-756.
2.  Silberman MR. Bicycling injuries. Curr Sports Med Rep . 2013;12:337-345.
3.  Barrios C, Sala D, T errados N, Valenti JR. Traumatic and overuse injuries in elite professional cyclists. Sports Exerc Inj . 1997;3:176-179.
4.  Clarsen B, Krosshaug T, Bahr R. Overuse injuries in professional road cyclists. Am J Sports Med . 2010;38:2494-2501.
5.  Kotler DH, Babu AN, Robidoux G. Prevention, Evaluation, and Rehabilitation of Cycling-Related Injury. Curr Sports Med Rep . 2016;15:199-206.
6.  Ruby P , Hull ML, Kirby KA, Jenkins DW. The effect of lower-limb anatomy on knee loads during seated cycling. J Biomech . 1992;25:1195-1207.
7.  Johnston TE. Biomechanical considerations for cycling interventions in rehabilitation. Phys Ther . 2007;87:1243-1252.
8.  Ericson MO, Nisell R. Patellofemoral joint forces during ergometric cycling. Phys Ther . 1987;67:13651369.
9.  van Ingen Schenau GJ, Boots PJ, de GG et al. The constrained control of force and position in multijoint movements. Neuroscience . 1992;46:197-207.
10.  Lankhorst NE, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, van MM. Risk factors for patellofemoral pain syndrome: a systematic review. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2012;42:81-94.
11.  T uite MJ. Imaging of triathlon injuries. Radiol Clin North Am . 2010;48:1125-1135.
12.  Gregersen CS, Hull ML, Hakansson NA. How changing the inversion/eversion foot angle affects the nondriving intersegmental knee moments and the relative activation of the vastii muscles in cycling. J Biomech Eng . 2006;128:391-398.
13.  Wolchok JC, Hull ML, Howell SM. The effect of intersegmental knee moments on patellofemoral contact mechanics in cycling. J Biomech . 1998;31:677683.
14.  Schwartz A, Watson JN, Hutchinson MR. Patellar Tendinopathy. Sports Health . 2015;7:415-420.
15.  Sandmeier R, Renstrom PA. Diagnosis and treatment of chronic tendon disorders in sports. Scand J Med Sci Sports . 1997;7:96-106.
16.  Aderem J, Louw QA. Biomechanical risk factors associated with iliotibial band syndrome in runners: a systematic review. BMC Musculoskelet Disord . 2015;16:356.
17.  Asplund C, St Pierre P . Knee pain and bicycling. The Physician and Sportsmedicine . 2004;32:23-30.
18.  Strauss EJ, Kim S, Calcei JG, Park D. Iliotibial band syndrome: evaluation and management. J Am Acad Orthop Surg . 2011;19:728-736.
19.  Noehren B, Davis I, Hamill J. ASB clinical biomechanics award winner 2006 prospective study of the biomechanical factors associated with iliotibial band syndrome. Clin Biomech (Bristol , Avon ) . 2007;22:951-956.
20.  Schindler OS. 'The Sneaky Plica' revisited: morphology, pathophysiology and treatment of synovial plicae of the knee. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc . 2014;22:247-262.
21.  Sanner WH, O'Halloran WD. The biomechanics, etiology, and treatment of cycling injuries. J Am Podiatr Med Assoc . 2000;90:354-376.
22.  Downs SH, Black N. The feasibility of creating a checklist for the assessment of the methodological quality both of randomised and non-randomised studies of health care interventions. J Epidemiol Community Health . 1998;52:377-384.
23.  Hootman JM, Driban JB, Sitler MR et al. Reliability and validity of three quality rating instruments for systematic reviews of observational studies. Res Synth Methods . 2011;2:110-118.
24.  Bailey MP , Maillardet FJ, Messenger N. Kinematics of cycling in relation to anterior knee pain and patellar tendinitis. J Sports Sci . 2003;21:649-657.
25.  Barratt PR, Korff T, Elmer SJ, Martin JC. Effect of crank length on joint-specifi  c power during maximal cycling. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2011;43:1689-1697.
26.  Elmer SJ, Barratt PR, Korff T, Martin JC. Jointspecifi  c power production during submaximal and maximal cycling. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2011;43:19401947.
27.  Barratt PR, Martin JC, Elmer SJ, Korff T. Effects of Pedal Speed and Crank Length on Pedaling Mechanics during Submaximal Cycling. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2016;48:705-713.
25.  Bini RR, Hume PA, Lanferdini FJ, Vaz MA. Effects of moving forward or backward on the saddle on knee joint forces during cycling. Phys Ther Sport . 2013;14:23-27.
29.  Bini RR, Hume PA, Kilding AE. Saddle height effects on pedal forces, joint mechanical work and kinematics of cyclists and triathletes. Eur J Sport Sci . 2014;14:44-52.
30.  Fang Y, Fitzhugh EC, Crouter SE et al. Effects of Workloads and Cadences on Frontal Plane Knee Biomechanics in Cycling. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2016;48:260-266.

31.  Farrell KC, Reisinger KD, Tillman MD. Force and repetition in cycling: possible implications for iliotibial band friction syndrome. Knee . 2003;10:103109.
32.  Ferrer-Roca V , Rivero-Palomo V , Ogueta-Alday A et al. Acute effects of small changes in crank length on gross effi  ciency and pedalling technique during submaximal cycling. J Sports Sci . 2016;1-8.
33.  T amborindeguy AC, Bini RR. Does saddle height affect patellofemoral and tibiofemoral forces during bicycling for rehabilitation? J Bodyw Mov Ther . 2011;15:186-191.
34.  Bini RR, Hume PA. Effects of saddle height on knee forces of recreational cyclists with and without knee pain. International SportMed Journal . 2014;15:188-199.
35.  Dieter BP , McGowan CP , Stoll SK, Vella CA. Muscle activation patterns and patellofemoral pain in cyclists. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2014;46:753-761.
36.  Gardner JK, Zhang S, Liu H et al. Effects of toe-in angles on knee biomechanics in cycling of patients with medial knee osteoarthritis. Clin Biomech (Bristol , Avon ) . 2015;30:276-282.
37.  Ericson MO, Nisell R. Tibiofemoral joint forces during ergometer cycling. Am J Sport Med . 1986;14:285-290.
38.  Ericson MO, Bratt A, Nisell R et al. Load moments about the hip and knee joints during ergometer cycling. Scand J Rehabil Med . 1986;18:165-172.
39.  Fleming BC, Beynnon BD, Renstrom PA et al. The strain behavior of the anterior cruciate ligament during bicycling. An in vivo study. Am J Sports Med . 1998;26:109-118.
40.  da Silva JC, T arassova O, Ekblom MM et al. Quadriceps and hamstring muscle activity during
11. cycling as measured with intramuscular electromyography. Eur J Appl Physiol . 2016;116:18071817.
41.  Wozniak Timmer CA. Cycling biomechanics: a literature review. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 1991;14:106-113.
42.  Luque-Seron JA, Medina-Porqueres I. Anterior Cruciate Ligament Strain In Vivo: A Systematic Review. Sports Health . 2016;8:451-455.
43.  Chester R, Smith TO, Sweeting D et al. The relative timing of VMO and VL in the aetiology of anterior knee pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Musculoskelet Disord . 2008;9:64.
44.  Salsich GB, Perman WH. Patellofemoral joint contact area is infl  uenced by tibiofemoral rotation alignment in individuals who have patellofemoral pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2007;37:521-528.
45.  Lee TQ, Morris G, Csintalan RP . The infl  uence of tibial and femoral rotation on patellofemoral contact area and pressure. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2003;33:686-693.
46.  Schindler OS, Scott WN. Basic kinematics and biomechanics of the patello-femoral joint. Part 1: The native patella. Acta Orthop Belg . 2011;77:421-431.
47.  Loudon JK. Biomechanics and Pathomechanics of the Patellofemoral Joint. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2016;11:820-830.
48.  Dye SF. The pathophysiology of patellofemoral pain: a tissue homeostasis perspective. Clin Orthop Relat Res . 2005;100-110.
49.  Ho KY, Keyak JH, Powers CM. Comparison of patella bone strain between females with and without patellofemoral pain: a fi  nite element analysis study. J Biomech . 2014;47:230-236.