<!-- image -->

## HYDRATION AND NUTRITION CONSIDERATIONS FOR ENDURANCE CYCLING EXERCISE IN THE HEAT

James R. Merritt, MA, Michal Ozga, MS, and J. Matthew Hinkley, PhD Gatorade Sports Science Institute, Valhalla, NY, USA

## KEY POINTS

- Road cycling is considered one of the most metabolically demanding competitions in endurance sports with daily energy expenditures 4-5 times greater than basal metabolic rates.
- The combination of hypohydration and heat stress observed while cycling for extended durations in warm environments may lead to impairments in cardiovascular function and performance at higher intensities.
- Both hydration status and fuel replenishment may impact endurance exercise performance when exercising in the heat.
- Heat exposure can further exacerbate the increased reliance on carbohydrate as a fuel source during exercise, leading to a reduction in muscle glycogen levels and increased prevalence of fatigue.
- Heat acclimation and proper 'gut training' may serve as practical means to maintain fluid balance, preserving plasma volume and protecting cardiovascular function while exercising in the heat.

## INTRODUCTION

Cycling races can last from minutes (i.e., time-trial) to several hours, where  riders  may  face  a  combination  of  periods  of  long-duration, moderately intense sections (i.e., peloton), and mountainous conditions with  high  power  outputs  and  sprints  that  combine  high  speeds  and power outputs. Road cycling is considered one of the most metabolically demanding  competitions  in  endurance  sports,  with  daily  energy expenditures 4-5 times greater than basal metabolic rates, equating to  6,000-8,500 kcals expended during a stage (Areta et al., 2024; Barranco-Gil  et  al.,  2024;  Van  Hooren  et  al.,  2023).  The  energetic demand  increases  metabolic  heat  production  by  the  contracting muscles, placing additional strain on the thermoregulatory system to maintain  core  temperature.  Sweating  is  the  primary  mechanism  to reduce core temperature, with average sweat rates during road cycling ranging from 0.5-2.0 L/h (Jay et al., 2024). Without proper fluid intake, combined with long race durations, increased sweat rates can severely impact fluid balance, with studies showing cyclists can lose &gt; 2% body mass (BM) (Armstrong et al., 2015; Sharwood et al., 2004), which has been shown to reduce endurance exercise performance (Cheuvront et al., 2003).

Along  with  the  burden  of  multi-day  stage  races  covering  hundreds of  miles,  riders  also  need  to  contend  with  unrelenting  environmental conditions.  During  the  first  stage  of  2024  Tour  de  France,  the  heat index  reached  40°C  (104°F).  This  was  following  the  2023  tour,  in which ambient temperatures exceeded 30°C (86°F) for 5 of the 21 stages. Along with the ambient temperature, reflected radiant heat can also impact riders, with the hottest stage in the 2023 Tour de France reporting  road  surface  temperatures  up  to  60°C  (140°F).  As  races typically  start  in  the  early  afternoon,  riders  regularly  compete  during the warmest hours of the day. With variable race stages under extreme environmental stressors, it is imperative to understand the physiological changes that occur with cycle exercise in the heat to aid in developing proper hydration and fueling strategies to optimize performance. The aim  of  this  Sports  Science  Exchange  (SSE)  article  is  to  provide  an overview  of  the  physiological  burdens  of  cycle  exercise  in  the  heat, with a primary focus on the impact of fluid balance and metabolism on performance under these conditions. The article provides hydration and nutrition recommendations for cycling in the heat, as well as identifies future  considerations  for  athletes  and  coaches  to  optimize  cycling performance under extreme environmental heat stress. It will also briefly discuss how heat mitigation strategies (i.e., heat acclimation) and 'gut training' promote positive changes in fluid balance and metabolism.

## PHYSIOLOGICAL DEMANDS

## Fluid Balance

It is generally recognized that the loss of 2% or more in BM leads to significant reductions in endurance exercise capacity and performance (Cheuvront  &amp;  Kenefick,  2014).  A  number  of  physiological  alterations due  to  hypohydration  (i.e.,  a  body  water  deficit  greater  than  normal daily  fluctuation)  during  exercise  have  been  outlined,  including  the reduction  in  circulating  plasma  volume  (Sawka  et  al.,  2015),  stroke volume (SV) and cardiac output (Q) (Montain &amp; Coyle, 1992), and the increase in body temperature (Sawka et al., 1985), muscle glycogen use (Logan-Sprenger et al., 2012) and perceived exertion (Funnell et al.,  2019).  When combined with heat stress, the physiological strain on the body is exacerbated, due to the increased competition for the limited  blood  volume  between  the  central  and  peripheral  circulatory systems (Kenefick et al., 2010), inhibiting the ability of the human body to maintain proper cardiovascular function during prolonged exercise.

The  interaction  between  exercise-induced  hypohydration  and  heat stress  while  cycling  has  been  characterized  through  an  increase  in total  peripheral  resistance  (TPR)  and  reductions  in  Q,  mean  arterial

SSE #262

pressure  and  SV  (González-Alonso  et  al.,  1997;  Montain  &amp;  Coyle, 1992), particularly at intensities greater than 60% maximum aerobic capacity (VO 2max ). TPR (i.e., the resistance in the circulatory system that is used to mediate the flow of blood) has been shown to be 10-17% higher in endurance-trained male cyclists, following 2 hr of continuous moderate-intensity  cycling  (62-71%  VO 2max )  in  a  hot  environment (35°C,  95°F)  when  in  a  ~4.4  -  4.9%  BM  deficit  ,  as  compared  to euhydrated (i.e., &lt; ±2% change in total body water) (González-Alonso et al., 1997). Under similar conditions, Montain &amp; Coyle (1992) reported a  strong  linear  correlation  between  the  degree  of  hypohydration  and the  observed  decline  in  SV  (r  =  0.99)  following  2  hr  of  continuous moderate-intensity  cycling  (62-67%  VO 2max ).  González-Alonso  et  al. (1997)  demonstrated  that  exercise-induced  hyperthermia  (i.e.,  body temperature &gt; 40°C, 104°F) and hypohydration separately decreased SV  7-8%  (11  mL/beat),  but  increased  heart  rate  adequately  to prevent a significant decrease in Q. However, when exercise-induced hyperthermia  and  hypohydration  were  superimposed,  the  observed reduction in SV was significantly greater (26 mL/beat) and Q was not preserved  (-2.8  L/min)  (González-Alonso  et  al.,  1997).  Watanabe  et al. (2020) observed similar reductions in SV (27 mL/beat) and Q (2.1 L/min) in both male and female cyclists following 2 hr of continuous moderate-intensity (50-55% maximum power output) cycling in a hot environment (35°C, 95°F; 50% relative humidity (RH)), and concluded that the observed declines in SV and Q may have been from limitations in venous return and left ventricle filling due to the reduction in total body water. Under normal conditions, an increase in TPR could be used as a countermeasure to moderate blood pressure and oxygen delivery, due  to  acute  changes  in  plasma  volume.  However,  the  significant decrease (~5%) in mean arterial pressure (i.e., the product of Q and TPR) observed by Gonzalez-Alonso et al. (1995, 1997) suggested that exercise-induced hypohydration may limit the body's ability to maintain cardiovascular function, impairing exercise capacity.

Evidence suggests that the physiological changes that occur with ≥ 2% loss in BM may impair cycling performance in warmer temperatures, with decrements being reported for power output, speed (Adams et al., 2018, 2019) and time trial (TT) completion (Funnell et al., 2019). For instance, Adams et al. (2018) reported lower power output and cycling speeds  during  a  5-km  TT  following  2  hr  of  continuous  moderateintensity cycling (55% VO 2max )  in  a  hot-dry environment (35°C, 95°F; 30% RH) when male subjects were in a ~2% BM deficit, as compared to euhydrated. Under similar conditions, comparable decrements in cycling performance were reported with male subjects completing a 15 min TT slower (2-18%) after ~3% loss in BM, as compared to euhydrated, following 2 hr of continuous cycling at 50% peak power output (Funnell et al., 2019). Together, these results support the understanding that the combination of hypohydration and heat stress observed while cycling for extended durations in warm environments may lead to impairments in  performance  at  higher  intensities.  In  addition  to  the  physiological changes  due  to  hypohydration,  further  decrements  in  performance while  cycling  for  extended  durations  in  warmer  environments,  may occur  through  alterations  in  the  sympathetic  nervous  system  and fuel selection.

## Metabolic Alterations

Cyclists rely heavily on oxidative metabolism, with energy derived from intramuscular,  non-muscular  (i.e.,  blood,  liver,  adipose)  carbohydrate and fat sources (Hargreaves &amp; Spriet, 2020). The primary determinants of substrate use include exercise intensity and duration (Hargreaves &amp; Spriet, 2020; Romijn et al., 1993). At the highest level of competition, athletes  regularly  compete  at  higher  exercise  intensities  (80-100% VO2max )  even during long duration events, such as endurance cycling (Hargreaves &amp; Spriet, 2020; Hawley &amp; Leckey, 2015; O'Brien et al., 1993).  As  the  energy  yield  is  more  efficient  than  fat,  carbohydrate oxidation is heavily relied on during competition, with increased use of carbohydrate muscle glycogen stores (Romijn et al., 1993). However, muscle  glycogen  stores  are  finite  (i.e.,  ~1,000-3,000  kcal),  and  a reduction in muscle glycogen levels leads to an increased prevalence of fatigue and decreased performance (Hargreaves &amp; Spriet, 2020).

Heat  exposure  can  further  exacerbate  the  increased  reliance  of carbohydrates as a fuel source during exercise. Previous studies have shown an increased respiratory  exchange  ratio  in  endurance-trained athletes during cycling exercise in a hot (40°C, 104°F) environment, in  comparison  to  cooler  (20°C,  68°F)  conditions  (Febbraio  et  al., 1994a, b; Hargreaves et al., 1996), suggesting a greater reliance on carbohydrate use. Greater reliance on carbohydrate use during cycling exercise in the heat may stem from differences in exercise intensity, environmental  conditions  (e.g.,  temperature,  RH,  radiant  heat,  wind speed) and changes in core/muscle temperature. Specifically, Maunder et  al.  (2020)  reported  that,  at  moderate  heat  stress  (34-35°C,  9395°F),  increases  in  carbohydrate  oxidation  were  only  evident  at higher  exercise  intensities,  (~81%  VO 2max )  when  compared  to  cooler conditions  (18°C,  64°F).  However,  when  environmental  temperature was elevated (40°C, 104°F), both moderate (~69% VO 2max ) and high intensity exercise (~81% VO 2max )  increased carbohydrate oxidation, in comparison to cooler conditions (Maunder et al., 2020). In contrast to previous studies (Febbraio et al., 1994a, b; Hargreaves et al., 1996), Charoensap et al. (2023) showed that cycle exercise in the heat led to  a  decrease  in  carbohydrate  use.  However,  despite  exercising  at similar  heart  rates,  power  output  was  also  reduced  (Charoensap et  al.,  2023),  further  solidifying  the  role  of  exercise  intensity  in mediating environment-induced changes in exercise metabolism. Along  with  environmental  temperature  and  exercise  intensity,  the increased reliance on carbohydrates during exercise in the heat may be  dependent  on  changes  in  body  core  temperature,  with  0.5°C  or greater  increase  in  body  core  temperature  leading  to  an  increase  in carbohydrate  use  (Febbraio,  2000;  Febbraio  et  al.,  1994a).  Further, heat-induced  dehydration  may  play  a  role  in  substrate  utilization. Logan-Sprenger et al. (2012, 2013, 2015) showed that fluid restriction during cycling exercise, causing &gt; 2% BM losses, led to higher rates of carbohydrate oxidation and muscle glycogen use, which coincided with  &gt;  0.5°C  increases  in  body  core  temperature,  in  comparison  to euhydrated conditions.

The greater reliance on carbohydrate utilization during exercise in the heat may be due to alterations in skeletal muscle metabolism. Previous

work  has  shown  a  decrease  in  muscle  glycogen  content  in  skeletal muscle following exercise in the heat (Febbraio, 2000; Febbraio et al., 1994a; Fink et al., 1975), potentially due to an increase in systemic epinephrine  levels  (Febbraio  et  al.,  1994).  However,  despite  the increased reliance during exercise, previous reports revealed that muscle glycogen levels are not severely depleted following fatiguing exercise in the heat (Parkin et al., 1999), suggesting substrate availability is not limiting  performance  under  these  environmental  conditions.  Exercise in the heat has also been shown to increase muscle and blood lactate concentration,  (Febbraio,  2000;  Febbraio  et  al.,  1994a;  Fink  et  al., 1975) and increased muscle inosine monophosphate (IMP) levels at the point of fatigue (Febbraio, 2000; Parkin et al., 1999). An increase in blood lactate concentration would suggest a mismatch between lactate formation via glycogen breakdown and lactate use by the mitochondria (Brooks,  2020).  Further,  the  accumulation  of  IMP  is  indicative  of decreased flux through the tricarboxylic acid cycle and reduced energy production  via  mitochondrial  oxidative  phosphorylation  (Sahlin  et  al., 1990). Previous studies have shown that the efficiency of mitochondria to  produce  energy  is  impaired  at  temperatures  over  40°C  (104°F) (Brooks et al., 1971; Willis &amp; Jackman, 1994). This is important, as Parkin  et  al.  (1999)  showed  that  fatigue  during  exercise  in  the  heat coincided with muscle temperatures &gt; 40°C (104°F). Together, these data  suggest  alterations  in  muscle  substrate  metabolism  may  be responsible  for  greater  whole-body  carbohydrate  utilization  during exercise  in  the  heat,  with  combined  reductions  in  muscle  glycogen stores and reduced mitochondrial energetics, leading to fatigue under these environmental conditions.

## FLUID INTAKE RECOMMENDATIONS

To mitigate the physiological changes caused by hypohydration during extended bouts of cycling in the heat, it is imperative to properly replace the  fluid  and  electrolytes  lost  through  sweating.  The  average  whole body sweat rates reported in one study with 255 endurance athletes in warm and humid environments (29°C, 84°F; 56% RH) was ~1.28 L/h, however, some athletes experienced sweat rates of up to 3-4 L/h (Barnes et al., 2019). Moreover, within an individual athlete, this can vary  based  on  exercise  intensity,  environmental  conditions,  training/ heat acclimation status and clothing (Baker, 2019). In a perfect world, athletes would be able to limit their sweat losses during exercise to less than  2%  BM.  However,  logistical  challenges  (i.e.,  carrying  sufficient fluid), gastrointestinal (GI) distress and beverage palatability may serve as hurdles in the fluid replacement process (Passe, 2001). Therefore, it is common for endurance athletes to experience gradual involuntary dehydration, finding themselves hypohydrated at the end of competition (Sharwood  et  al.,  2004).  Nonetheless,  cycling  presents  a  variety  of situations  in  which  dehydration  is  likely  to  be  observed,  therefore  it is  important  to  consider  the  proper  hydration  strategies  (i.e.,  timing, amount, and type) to limit any potential decrements in performance.

To achieve proper hydration, the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) suggests athletes consume a fluid volume equivalent to 5-10

mL/kg  BM  during  the  2-4  hr  leading  up  to  the  exercise  session (Thomas  et  al.,  2016).  During  exercise,  it  is  recommended  that athletes consume fluid at a rate that is sufficient to prevent &gt; 2% BM deficit and to avoid overdrinking, leading to body mass gain (Thomas et  al.,  2016).  Inclusion  of  sodium  in  a  fluid-replacement  drink  may increase  voluntary  fluid  ingestion  through  improvements  in  beverage palatability,  which  may  help  athletes  maintain  plasma  volume  during bouts of prolonged exercise in the heat (Clapp et al., 2000; Wemple et al., 1997). Interestingly, Wemple et al. (1997) found that beverages containing ≥ 50 mmol/L of sodium decreased palatability and voluntary fluid  ingestion,  and  therefore  should  be  avoided.  Previous  research has  suggested  that  endurance  athletes  should  consume  beverages with sodium concentrations between 30 -50 mmol/L  during prolonged bouts of exercise (i.e., &gt; 3 hr) (Maughan, 1991), however, the  amount  of  sodium  that  athletes  should  ingest  as  part  of  their rehydration strategy may vary, especially for athletes with high sweat rates  &gt;  1.2  L/h  or  'salty  sweaters'  (i.e.,  &gt;  60  mmol/L  whole  body sweat sodium) (Thomas et al., 2016). Post-exercise, athletes should focus  on  the  consumption  of  water  and  sodium  at  a  moderate  rate, accounting for additional urinary losses and post-exercise sweat loss (Sawka et al., 2007). For this, the ACSM recommends that athletes consume 1.25-1.5 L/kg of any remaining BM deficit (Thomas et al., 2016). Lastly, the presence of carbohydrates in a sports beverage is important for the stimulation of water absorption in the gut. Previous research has indicated that carbohydrate type (Jentjens et al., 2006; Shi &amp; Passe, 2010) and concentration (Jeukendrup et al., 2009; Murray et al., 1999) can impact fluid absorption. Specifically, the presence of 1-3% carbohydrates in a sports beverage may positively impact the rate of fluid delivery, but fluid delivery may be compromised when &gt; 6% carbohydrate beverages are ingested (Jeukendrup et al., 2009). Once the fluid  is  absorbed,  it  is  imperative  that  it  is  retained  in  the blood  to  maintain  plasma  volume,  promoting  proper  cardiovascular and thermoregulatory function. As such, there are two main ways to promote  fluid  retention:  1)  stimulating  renal  water  reabsorption  and 2) slowing the appearance of fluid into the circulatory system. While the  former  is  largely  regulated  by  plasma  sodium  concentration,  the latter can be modified by increasing the energy density of the sports beverage. Several studies have reported that sports beverages containing 6-12% carbohydrates may promote greater fluid retention, following  ~2-3%  dehydrating  exercise,  as  compared  to  electrolytematched  beverages  (Baker  &amp;  Jeukendrup,  2014).  However,  future research is needed to determine the exact mechanism(s) involved in this  interaction.  In  all,  no  individual  rehydration  strategy  will  be  right for  all  athletes,  so  differences  in  environmental  conditions,  sweat rate, BM and exercise intensity/duration should always be considered (Armstrong, 2021). Moreover, it is important for athletes to experiment with various rehydration strategies during training sessions, prior to use during  competition  in  hot  environments.  This  will  provide  the  athlete time to account for their individual sweat rates, gut tolerance, logistical challenges and need to consume other nutrients (i.e., carbohydrates and electrolytes) to maximize their performance.

## NUTRITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

The benefits of carbohydrate feeding to provide contracting muscles a fuel source have been known since the early 20th century (Krogh &amp; Lindhard, 1920), with seminal studies in the 1980s showing a direct link between carbohydrate ingestion and exercise capacity (Coggan &amp; Coyle, 1987; Coyle et al.,  1983).  By  providing  an  external  (i.e.,  exogenous) carbohydrate source, internal (i.e., endogenous) carbohydrate sources, such as muscle and liver glycogen, may be preserved and help to provide a constant source of carbohydrates, preventing a drop in blood glucose concentration during competition. Together, this has led to formulation of carbohydrate-containing products aimed to optimize exercise performance, with a variety (i.e., beverages, gels, bars) commercially available to meet the practical needs of a cyclist (Pfeiffer et al., 2012). With endurance cycling events lasting over 1 hr, carbohydrate feeding is critical for performance. The ACSM has recommended that athletes consume 30-60 g carbohydrate/hr (Thomas et al., 2016), basing this guideline on research showing that absorption of single carbohydrate sources  in  the  intestine  is  limited  to  ~1  g/min  (Jeukendrup,  2014; Jeukendrup &amp; Jentjens, 2000). However, a combination of carbohydrate sources, such as glucose and fructose, which are absorbed separately in the gut via different transporters (i.e., multiple transportable carbohydrates), has been shown to increase exogenous carbohydrate use to &gt; 1 g/min. This has led cyclists to increase carbohydrate intake (&gt; 90 g/h of multiple transportable carbohydrates) during long-duration rides lasting over 4 hr (Jeukendrup, 2014; Stellingwerff &amp; Cox, 2014), with recent data suggesting carbohydrate intake of ~120 g/h of mixed glucose/fructose sources using various product types is tolerable for trained cyclists (Hearris et al., 2022).

While the impact of exercise in the heat on endogenous carbohydrate use is well established, few studies have examined how heat affects exogenous carbohydrate use during exercise. The limited studies have shown that the composition of a carbohydrate drink may impact the availability and use of carbohydrate to fuel cycling exercise in the heat. Jentjens et al. (2002) reported that exogenous glucose oxidation of an 8% glucose beverage was reduced to ~0.7 g/min when cycling in the heat, which was ~10% lower to that seen during a similar cycling bout in  cooler  conditions.  In  comparison  to  single-source  carbohydrates, multiple transportable carbohydrates have been shown to increase the use of ingested carbohydrates during cycling in the heat. In a follow-up from their 2002 study, Jentjens et al. (2006) showed that ingesting a  2:1  glucose:fructose  beverage  increased  exogenous  carbohydrate oxidation  to  ~1.14  g/min  when  cycling  in  the  heat,  which  was  36% higher than glucose alone. The authors also reported that endogenous carbohydrate use was reduced when a glucose:fructose beverage was provided.  Along  with  the  metabolic  benefits,  ingestion  of  a  multiple transportable carbohydrate beverage may increase fluid absorption, in comparison to a single-source carbohydrate beverage, contributing to an improvement in fluid balance (Jentjens et al., 2006). Together, these studies suggest multiple transportable carbohydrate sources are ideal to  fuel  cycling  performance  of  well-trained  athletes  in  the  heat,  with 30-60 g/h ingestion for stages lasting 1-2.5 hr and &gt; 90 g/h, based on individual tolerability of the cyclist, for stages lasting more than 2.5 hr

(Coggan &amp; Coyle, 1987; Coyle et al., 1983; Jeukendrup, 2014).

Previous research has indicated that carbohydrate feeding may improve exercise  capacity  in  the  heat  (Carter  et  al.,  2003,  2005;  Pitsiladis &amp;  Maughan,  1999).  The  reason  for  the  improvement  in  exercise performance  does  not  appear  to  be  metabolic.  Specifically,  some (Angus et al., 2001; Jentjens et al., 2002) but not all (Yaspelkis &amp; Ivy, 1991) studies have shown that the use of muscle glycogen remains elevated  when  exercising  in  the  heat,  following  feeding  with  6-8% glucose  solution.  Further,  the  benefits  of  carbohydrates  in  the  heat are  apparent  during  the  early  stages  of  exercise  (&lt;  1  hr  of  cycling), a timepoint in which ingested carbohydrates do not influence muscle metabolism. Carter et al. (2003) suggested the benefits of carbohydrate feeding on cycling performance in the heat may be due to the ergogenic effects on the central nervous system (Chambers et al., 2009; Gant et al., 2010). However, the receptors and mechanism of action in the brain  that  mediate  these  beneficial  effects  have  not  been  identified (Jeukendrup,  2014).  Interestingly,  studies  have  shown  that  mouth rinsing  with  carbohydrates  does  not  influence  cycling  performance in the heat (Cramer et al., 2015; Watson et al., 2014); therefore, the mechanisms  in  which  carbohydrates  improve  cycling  performance, particularly in bouts &lt; 1 hr in duration, are unclear.

## OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

## Heat Acclimation

Heat acclimation is developed through repeated exposure to environmental conditions that sufficiently elevate core and skin temperatures,  inducing  profuse  sweating  (Périard  et  al.,  2015).  The intensity, duration, frequency and number of heat exposures, as well as  differences  in  environmental  conditions  (i.e.,  dry  vs  humid  heat), determine the magnitude to which one acclimates (Périard et al., 2015). It is widely accepted that heat acclimation improves thermoregulation by increasing sweat rate, decreasing sweat sodium concentrations and initiating  sweating  at  lower  core  temperatures  (Nielsen  et  al.,  1997; Roberts et al., 1977; Sawka et al., 2011; Taylor, 2014). To sustain the elevated sweat rates, previous studies have suggested that the eccrine sweat glands become more resistant to fatigue (Périard et al., 2015) and total body water stores are increased by ~5-7% (Patterson et al., 2014;  Wyndham et al.,  1968).  Previous  research  has  indicated  that heat acclimation training improves VO 2max ,  Q,  and TT performance in endurance-trained male cyclists (Nielsen et al.,  1993;  Périard  et  al., 2024; Sekiguchi et al., 2022). While the changes in Q may stem from an increase in aldosterone production (Nielsen et al., 1993), the gains in  performance metrics may partly be attributed to the improvement in metabolism (Young et al., 1985). Specifically, studies have reported altered whole-body (Sawka et al., 1996) and skeletal muscle metabolism (Young et al., 1985) via reductions in muscle glycogen utilization (King et al., 1985; Kirwan et al., 1987) and oxygen uptake during submaximal exercise (Sawka et al., 1983). Further, previous studies have reported a reduction in blood and muscle lactate accumulation during exercise at ~70% VO2max (Febbraio et al., 1994a) and an increase in power output at  lactate  threshold  following  a  10-day  heat  acclimation  program  in

trained cyclists (Lorenzo et al., 2010). In all, the adaptations observed after acclimating to the heat may lead to reduced physiological strain and improvements in comfort and performance during prolonged bouts of exercise in warm environments.

## Gut Training

Consuming the amount of fluid and carbohydrates required for proper hydration and fueling may cause GI discomfort and distress, especially when  combined  with  high  intensity  or  prolonged  exercise  in  warm environments (Neufer et al., 1989). To better handle the stress caused by  increased  fluid  and  carbohydrate  intake,  it  has  been  suggested that athletes participate in so called 'gut training' to improve gastric emptying  and  absorption  of  high  carbohydrate  and/or  fluid  loads, leading to reduced GI problems (Jeukendrup, 2017). Previous studies investigating carbohydrate 'gut training' have shown similar effects on gastric emptying rate despite differences in amount and duration of the training  period  (Cox  et  al.,  2010;  Horowitz  et  al.,  1996).  Horowitz  et al. (1996) reported that the supplementation of 440 g glucose/day for 4-7 days significantly accelerated gastric emptying for both glucose and fructose in untrained subjects. Moreover, when investigating the effects  of  long-term  (28-day)  carbohydrate  supplementation,  Cox et  al.  (2010)  reported  improved  exogenous  carbohydrate  oxidation rates  in  endurance-trained  cyclists  who  consumed  an  additional  1.5 g carbohydrate/kg BM for every hour of exercise completed each day (~8.5  g·kg -1 ·day -1 ).  Together,  these  results  suggest  that  proper  'gut training' may allow endurance athletes to consume sports beverages with higher carbohydrate concentrations, optimizing intestinal fluid and carbohydrate absorption. However, the impact of gut training on fluid and carbohydrate reabsorption during exercise in the heat is unclear and requires future investigation.

## KNOWLEDGE GAPS

Despite  the  known  physiological  impact  of  exercise  in  the  heat  and potential strategies to minimize the detrimental effects, several research  questions  remain  to  optimize  cycling  performance  under these environmental conditions. Previous research has suggested that increasing the carbohydrate content of the beverage may improve fluid retention due to slower gastric emptying, however, future research is needed to determine the exact mechanism(s) involved in this interaction. While recent research suggests, if tolerable, that carbohydrate loads &gt; 90 g/h may be used during prolonged cycling bouts (&gt; 2.5 hr), the impact of carbohydrate amount and type (i.e., beverage, gels, bars) on exercise performance and GI distress in the heat is unknown. Finally, further studies are needed to understand the mechanism(s) that link carbohydrate  intake  to  improved  performance  in  the  heat,  in  bouts lasting less than 1 hr.

## SUMMARY

Environmental heat exposure can negatively impact fluid balance and fuel  utilization  in  cyclists,  severely  impairing  performance.  However, with  proper  hydration  and  optimal  carbohydrate  feeding  strategies, the  impacts  of  extreme  heat  can  be  minimized.  Further,  training strategies,  such  as  heat  acclimation  and  'gut  training',  allow  the cyclist to withstand the stress of environmental heat exposure and the higher  fluid  and  fuel  requirements,  respectively,  to  further  enhance performance. Collectively,  by  understanding  the  physiological  impact of heat exposure on athletic performance, cyclists and their coaches can optimize personalized fueling and training strategies to meet the individual needs during races under extreme heat conditions.

## PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS

- While some dehydration is expected, endurance athletes should aim to consume a sufficient amount of an electrolytecontaining sports beverage to limit body mass deficits to &lt; 2%, especially when exercising in warm environments.
- Athletes should aim to consume 1.25-1.5 L/kg of any remaining body mass deficit of an electrolyte-containing beverage at a moderate rate post-exercise to restore euhydration.
- No individual rehydration strategy will be right for all athletes, so athletes should experiment with various rehydration strategies during training sessions, prior to use during competition in hot environments.
- To maximize performance, endurance cyclists should consume a combination of multiple transportable carbohydrate sources at a rate of 30-60 g/h for stages lasting 1-2.5 hr and &gt; 90 g/h for stages lasting &gt; 2.5 hr.
- With proper 'gut training' carbohydrate intakes of 120 g/h of mixed glucose/fructose sources using various product types may be tolerable in well-trained cyclists.

The authors are employed by the Gatorade Sports Science Institute, a division of PepsiCo R&amp;D. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position or policy of PepsiCo, Inc.

## REFERENCES

Adams,  J.D.,  Y.  Sekiguchi,  H.G.  Suh,  A.D.  Seal,  C.A.  Sprong,  T.W.  Kirkland,  and  S.A. Kavouras (2018). Dehydration impairs cycling performance, independently of thirst: A blinded study. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 50:1697-1703.

Adams, J.D., D.M. Scott, N.A. Brand, H.G. Suh, A.D. Seal, B.P. McDermott, M.S. Ganio, and S.A. Kavouras (2019). Mild hypohydration impairs cycle ergometry performance in the heat: A blinded study. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 29:686-695.

- Angus, D.J., M.A. Febbraio, D. Lasini, and M. Hargreaves (2001). Effect of carbohydrate ingestion on glucose kinetics during exercise in the heat. J. Appl. Physiol. 90:601605.
- Areta, J.L., E. Meehan, G. Howe, and L.M. Redman (2024). Energetics of a world-tour female road cyclist during a multistage race (Tour de France Femmes). Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 34:253-257.
- Armstrong,  L.E.  (2021).  Rehydration  during  endurance  exercise:  challenges,  research, options, methods. Nutrients 13:887.

Armstrong,  L.E.,  E.C.  Johnson,  A.L.  McKenzie,  L.A.  Ellis,  and  K.H.  Williamson  (2015). Ultraendurance cycling in a hot environment. J. Strength Cond. Res. 29:869-876. Baker, L.B. (2019). Physiology of sweat gland function: The roles of sweating and sweat composition in human health. Temperature 6:211-259.

Baker,  L.B.,  and  A.E.  Jeukendrup  (2014).  Optimal  composition  of  fluid-replacement beverages. Compr. Physiol. 4:575-620).

Barnes, K.A., M.L. Anderson, J.R. Stofan, K.J. Dalrymple, A.J. Reimel, T.J. Roberts, R.K. Randell, C.T. Ungaro, and L.B. Baker (2019). Normative data for sweating rate, sweat sodium concentration, and sweat sodium loss in athletes: An update and analysis by sport. J. Sports Sci. 37:2356-2366.

Barranco-Gil, D., X. Muriel, A. Lucia, M.J. Joyner, C.A. DeSouza, and P.L. Valenzuela (2024). The Tour de France, also possible for mortals? A comparison of a recreational and a World Tour cyclist. J. Appl. Physiol. 136:432-436.

Brooks, G.A. (2020). Lactate as a fulcrum of metabolism. Redox Biol. 35:101454.

Brooks, G.A., K.J. Hittelman, J.A. Faulkner, and R.E. Beyer (1971). Temperature, skeletal muscle mitochondrial functions, and oxygen debt. Am. J. Physiol. 220:1053-1059.

Carter, J., A.E. Jeukendrup, T. Mundel, and D.A. Jones (2003). Carbohydrate supplementation improves moderate and high-intensity exercise in the heat. Eur. J. Physiol. 446:211219.

Carter, J., A.E. Jeukendrup, and D.A. Jones (2005). The effect of sweetness on the efficacy of  carbohydrate  supplementation during exercise in the heat. Can. J. Appl. Physiol. 30:379-391.

Chambers, E.S., M.W. Bridge, and D.A. Jones. (2009). Carbohydrate sensing in the human mouth: effects on exercise performance and brain activity. J. Physiol. 587:1779-1794.

Charoensap, T., A.E. Kilding, and E. Maunder (2023). Carbohydrate, but not fat, oxidation is reduced  during  moderate-intensity  exercise  performed  in  33  vs.  18  °C  at  matched heart rates. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 123:2073-2085.

Cheuvront,  S.N.,  and  R.W.  Kenefick  (2014).  Dehydration:  Physiology,  assessment,  and performance. Compr. Physiol. 4:257-285.

Cheuvront, S.N., R. Carter, and M.N. Sawka (2003). Fluid balance and endurance exercise performance. Curr. Sports Med. Rep. 2:202-208.

Clapp, A.J., P.A. Bishop, J.F. Smith, and E.R. Mansfield (2000). Effects of carbohydrateelectrolyte  content  of  beverages  on  voluntary  hydration  in  a  simulated  industrial environment. Am. Indust. Hygiene Assoc. 61:692-699.

Coggan,  A.R.,  and  E.F.  Coyle  (1987).  Reversal  of  fatigue  during  prolonged  exercise  by carbohydrate infusion or ingestion. J. Appl. Physiol. 63:2388-2395.

Cox, G.R., S.A. Clark, A.J. Cox, S.L. Halson, M. Hargreaves, J.A. Hawley, N. Jeacocke, R.J. Snow,  W.K.  Yeo,  and  L.M.  Burke  (2010).  Daily  training  with  high  carbohydrate availability increases exogenous carbohydrate oxidation during endurance cycling. J. Appl. Physiol. 109:126-134.

Coyle, E.F., J.M. Hagberg, B.F. Hurley, W.H. Martin, A.A. Ehsani, and J.O. Holloszy (1983). Carbohydrate feeding during prolonged strenuous exercise can delay fatigue. J. Appl. Physiol. 55:230-235.

Cramer, M.N., M.W. Thompson, and J.D. Périard (2015). Thermal and cardiovascular strain mitigate the potential benefit of carbohydrate mouth rinse during self-paced exercise in the heat. Front. Physiol. 6:354.

Febbraio, M.A. (2000). Does muscle function and metabolism affect exercise performance in the heat? Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev. 28:171-176.

Febbraio, M.A., R.J. Snow, M. Hargreaves, C.G. Stathis, I.K. Martin, and M.F. Carey (1994a). Muscle metabolism during exercise and heat stress in trained men: Effect of acclimation. J. Appl. Physiol. 76:589-597.

Febbraio, M.A., R.J. Snow, C.G. Stathis, M. Hargreaves, and M.F. Carey (1994b). Effect of heat stress on muscle energy metabolism during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 77:28272831.

Fink, W.J., D.L. Costill, and P.J. Van Handel (1975). Leg muscle metabolism during exercise in the heat and cold. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 34:183-190.

Funnell, M.P., S.A. Mears, K. Bergin-Taylor, and L.J. James (2019). Blinded and unblinded hypohydration  similarly  impair  cycling  time  trial  performance  in  the  heat  in  trained cyclists. J. Appl. Physiol. 126:870-879.

Gant, N., C.M. Stinear, and W.D. Byblow (2010). Carbohydrate in the mouth immediately facilitates motor output. Brain Res. 1350:151-158.

Gonzalez-Alonso,  J.,  R.  Mora-Rodriguez,  P.R.  Below,  and  E.F.  Coyle  (1995).  Dehydration reduces  cardiac  output  and  increases  systemic  and  cutaneous  vascular  resistance during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 79:1487-1496.

González-Alonso,  J.,  R.  Mora-Rodríguez,  P.R.  Below,  and  E.F.  Coyle  (1997).  Dehydration markedly impairs cardiovascular function in hyperthermic endurance athletes during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 82:1229-1236.

Hargreaves, M., and L.L. Spriet (2020). Skeletal muscle energy metabolism during exercise. Nat. Metab. 2:817-828.

Hargreaves, M., D. Angus, K. Howlett, N.M. Conus, and M. Febbraio (1996). Effect of heat stress on glucose kinetics during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 81:1594-1597.

Hawley, J.A., and J.J. Leckey (2015). Carbohydrate dependence during prolonged, intense endurance exercise. Sports Med. 45(Suppl 1): 5-12.

Hearris,  M.A.,  J.N.  Pugh,  C.  Langan-Evans,  S.J.  Mann,  L.  Burke,  T.  Stellingwerff,  J.T. Gonzalez, and J.P. Morton (2022). 13C-glucose-fructose labeling reveals comparable exogenous CHO oxidation during exercise when consuming 120 g/h in fluid, gel, jelly chew, or coingestion. J. Appl. Physiol. 132:1394-1406.

Horowitz, M., K.M. Cunningham, J.M. Wishart, K.L. Jones, and N.W. Read (1996). The effect of short-term dietary supplementation with glucose on gastric emptying of glucose and fructose and oral glucose tolerance in normal subjects. Diabetologia 39:481-486.

- Jay, O., J.D. Périard, B. Clark, L. Hunt, H. Ren, H.G. Suh, R.R. Gonzalez, and M.N. Sawka (2024).  Whole  body  sweat  rate  prediction:  outdoor  running  and  cycling  exercise.  J. Appl. Physiol. 136:1478-1487.

Jentjens, R.L., A.J.M. Wagenmakers, and A.E. Jeukendrup (2002). Heat stress increases muscle  glycogen  use  but  reduces  the  oxidation  of  ingested  carbohydrates  during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 92:1562-1572.

Jentjens, R.L. K. Underwood, J. Achten, K. Currell, C.H. Mann, and A.E. Jeukendrup (2006). Exogenous  carbohydrate  oxidation  rates  are  elevated  after  combined  ingestion  of glucose and fructose during exercise in the heat. J. Appl. Physiol. 100:807-816.

- Jeukendrup, A.E. (2014). A step towards personalized sports nutrition: carbohydrate intake during exercise. Sports Med. 44(Suppl 1):S25-S33.

Jeukendrup, A.E. (2017). Training the gut for athletes. Sports Med. 47(Suppl 1):101-110. Jeukendrup,  A.E.,  and  R.  Jentjens  (2000).  Oxidation  of  carbohydrate  feedings  during prolonged  exercise:  current  thoughts,  guidelines  and  directions  for  future  research. Sports Med. 29:407-424.

Jeukendrup, A.E., K. Currell, J. Clarke, J. Cole, and A.K. Blannin (2009). Effect of beverage glucose and sodium content on fluid delivery. Nutr. Metab. 6:9.

Kenefick,  R.W.,  S.N.  Cheuvront,  L.J.  Palombo,  B.R.  Ely,  and  M.N.  Sawka  (2010).  Skin temperature modifies the impact of hypohydration on aerobic performance. J. Appl. Physiol. 109:79-86.

King,  D.S.,  D.L.  Costill,  W.J.  Fink,  M.  Hargreaves,  and  R.A.  Fielding  (1985).  Muscle metabolism during exercise in the heat in unacclimatized and acclimatized humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 59:1350-1354.

Kirwan, J.P., D.L. Costill, H. Kuipers, M.J. Burrell, W.J. Fink, J.E. Kovaleski, and R.A. Fielding (1987).  Substrate  utilization  in  leg  muscle  of  men  after  heat  acclimation.  J.  Appl. Physiol. 63:31-35.

Krogh, A., and J. Lindhard (1920). The relative value of fat and carbohydrate as sources of muscular energy: With appendices on the correlation between standard metabolism and the respiratory quotient during rest and work. Biochem. J. 14:290-363.

Logan-Sprenger, H.M., G.J.F. Heigenhauser, K.J. Killian, and L.L. Spriet (2012). Effects of dehydration during cycling on skeletal muscle metabolism in females. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 44:1949-1957.

Logan-Sprenger, H.M., G.J.F. Heigenhauser, G.L. Jones, and L.L. Spriet. (2013). Increase in skeletal  muscle  glycogenolysis  and  perceived  exertion  with  progressive  dehydration during cycling in hydrated men. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 23 :220-229.

Logan-Sprenger, H.M., G.J.F. Heigenhauser, G.L. Jones, and l.L. Spriet (2015). The effect of dehydration on muscle metabolism and time trial performance during prolonged cycling in males. Physiol. Rep. 3:e12483.

Lorenzo, S., J.R. Halliwill, M.N. Sawka, and C.T. Minson (2010). Heat acclimation improves exercise performance. J. Appl. Physiol. 109:1140-1147.

Maughan, R.J. (1991). Fluid and electrolyte loss and replacement in exercise. J. Sports Sci. 9:117-142.

Maunder, E.D., D.J. Plews, F. Merien, and A.E. Kilding (2020). Exercise intensity regulates the effect of heat stress on substrate oxidation rates during exercise. Eur. J. Sport Sci. 20:935-943.

Montain, S.J., and E.F. Coyle (1992). Influence of graded dehydration on hyperthermia and cardiovascular drift during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 73:1340-1350.

Murray, R., W. Bartoli, J. Stofan, M. Horn, and D. Eddy (1999). A Comparison of the gastric emptying characteristics of selected sports drinks. Int. J. Sport Nutr. 9:263-274.

- Neufer, P.D., A.J. Young, and M.N. Sawka (1989). Gastric emptying during exercise: effects of heat stress and hypohydration. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 58:433-439.
- Nielsen,  B.,  J.R.  Hales,  S.  Strange,  N.J.  Christensen,  J.  Warberg,  and  B.  Saltin  (1993). Human  circulatory  and  thermoregulatory  adaptations  with  heat  acclimation  and exercise in a hot, dry environment. J. Physiol. 460:467-485.
- Nielsen,  B.,  S.  Strange,  N.J.  Christensen,  J.  Warberg,  and  B.  Saltin  (1997).  Acute  and adaptive responses in humans to exercise in a warm, humid environment. Pflug. Arch. 434:49-56.
- O'Brien, M.J., C.A. Viguie, R.S. Mazzeo, and G.A. Brooks (1993). Carbohydrate dependence during marathon running. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 25:1009-1017.
- Parkin, J.M., M.F. Carey, S. Zhao, and M.A. Febbraio (1999). Effect of ambient temperature on human skeletal muscle metabolism during fatiguing submaximal exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 86:902-908.

Passe,  D.H.  (2001).  Physiological  and  psychological  determinants  of  fluid  intake.  In  R.J. Maughan &amp; R. Murray (Eds.), Sports Drinks: Basic Science and Practical Aspects (pp. 45-87). CRC Press.

Patterson,  M.J.,  J.M.  Stocks,  and  N.A.S.  Taylor  (2014).  Whole-body  fluid  distribution  in humans  during  dehydration  and  recovery,  before  and  after  humid-heat  acclimation induced using controlled hyperthermia. Acta Physiol. 210:899-912.

Périard, J.D., S. Racinais, and M.N. Sawka (2015). Adaptations and mechanisms of human heat acclimation: Applications for competitive athletes and sports. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 25(Suppl 1):20-38.

Périard, J.D., D. Nichols, G. Travers, S. Cocking, N. Townsend, H.A. Brown, and S. Racinais (2024). Impact of exercise heat acclimation on performance in hot, cool and hypoxic conditions. J. Sci. Sport Exerc. 6 :275-287.

Pfeiffer,  B.,  T.  Stellingwerff,  A.B.  Hodgson,  R.  Randell,  K.  Pöttgen,  P.  Res,  and  A.E. Jeukendrup (2012). Nutritional intake and gastrointestinal problems during competitive endurance events. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 44:344-351.

Pitsiladis, Y.P., and R.J. Maughan (1999). The effects of exercise and diet manipulation on the  capacity  to  perform  prolonged  exercise  in  the  heat  and  in  the  cold  in  trained humans. J. Physiol. 517: 919-930.

Roberts,  M.F.,  C.B.  Wenger,  J.A.  Stolwijk,  and  E.R.  Nadel  (1977).  Skin  blood  flow  and sweating changes following exercise training and heat acclimation. J. Appl. Physiol. 43:133-137.

Romijn, J.A., E.F. Coyle, L.S. Sidossis, A. Gastaldelli, J.F. Horowitz, E. Endert, and R.R. Wolfe (1993).  Regulation  of  endogenous  fat  and  carbohydrate  metabolism  in  relation  to exercise intensity and duration. Am. J. Physiol. 265:E380-E391.

- Sahlin, K., A. Katz, and S. Broberg (1990). Tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates in human muscle during prolonged exercise. Am. J. Physiol. 259:C834-C841.

Sawka, M.N., K.B. Pandolf, B.A. Avellini, and Y. Shapiro (1983). Does heat acclimation lower the  rate  of  metabolism  elicited  by  muscular  exercise?  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med. 54:27-31.

Sawka,  M.N.,  A.J.  Young,  R.P.  Francesconi,  S.R.  Muza,  and  K.B.  Pandolf  (1985). Thermoregulatory and blood responses during exercise at graded hypohydration levels. J. Appl. Physiol. 59:1394-1401.

- Sawka, M.N., C.B. Wenger, and K.B. Pandolf. (1996). Thermoregulatory responses to acute exercise-heat stress and heat acclimation. Compr. Physiol. (pp.157-185). Wiley.
- Sawka, M.N., L.M. Burke, E.R. Eichner, R.J. Maughan, S.J. Montain, and N.S. Stachenfeld (2007). Exercise and fluid replacement. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 39:377-390.

Sawka,  M.N.,  L.R.  Leon,  S.J.  Montain,  and  L.A.  Sonna  (2011).  Integrated  physiological mechanisms of exercise performance, adaptation, and maladaptation to heat stress. Compr. Physiol. 1:1883-1928.

Sawka,  M.N.,  S.N.  Cheuvront,  and  R.W.  Kenefick  (2015).  Hypohydration  and  human performance:  Impact  of  environment  and  physiological  mechanisms.  Sports  Med. 45:51-60.

Sekiguchi, Y.,  C.L.  Benjamin,  C.N.  Manning,  J.F.  Struder,  L.E.  Armstrong,  E.C.  Lee,  R.A. Huggins,  R.L.  Stearns,  L.J.  Distefano,  and  D.J.  Casa  (2022).  Effects  of  heat acclimatization, heat acclimation, and intermittent exercise heat training on time-trial performance. Sports Health 14:694-701.

- Sharwood, K.A.,  M.  Collins,  J.H.  Goedecke,  G.  Wilson,  and  T.D.  Noakes  (2004).  Weight changes, medical complications, and performance during an Ironman triathlon. Br. J. Sports Med. 38:718-724.
- Shi, X., and D.H. Passe (2010). Water and solute absorption from carbohydrate-electrolyte solutions in the human  proximal small intestine: A review and statistical analysis. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 20:427-442.
- Stellingwerff, T., and G.R. Cox (2014). Systematic review: Carbohydrate supplementation on exercise performance or capacity of varying durations. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 39 :998-1011.

Taylor, N.A.S. (2014). Human heat adaptation. Compr. Physiol. 4:325-365.

- Thomas, D.T., K.A. Erdman, and L.M. Burke. (2016). American College of Sports Medicine joint position statement. nutrition and athletic performance. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 48:543-568.
- Van  Hooren,  B.,  M.  Cox,  G.  Rietjens,  and  G.  Plasqui  (2023).  Determination  of  energy expenditure in professional cyclists using power data: Validation against doubly labeled water. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 33: 407-419.
- Watanabe,  K.,  E.J.  Stöhr,  K.  Akiyama,  S.  Watanabe,  and  J.  González-Alonso  (2020). Dehydration  reduces  stroke  volume  and  cardiac  output  during  exercise  because  of impaired cardiac filling and venous return, not left ventricular function. Physiol. Rep. 8:e14483.
- Watson, P., D. Nichols, and P. Cordery (2014). Mouth rinsing with a carbohydrate solution does not influence cycle time trial performance in the heat. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 39 :1064-1069.
- Wemple, R.D., T.S. Morocco, and G.W. Mack (1997). Influence of sodium replacement on fluid ingestion following exercise-induced dehydration. Int. J. Sport Nutr. 7:104-116.
- Willis, W.T., and M.R. Jackman (1994). Mitochondrial function during heavy exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 26:1347-1353.
- Wyndham,  C.H.,  A.J.  Benade,  C.G.  Williams,  N.B.  Strydom,  A.  Goldin,  and  A.J.  Heyns (1968). Changes in central circulation and body fluid spaces during acclimatization to heat. J. Appl. Physiol. 25:586-593.

Yaspelkis,  B.B.,  and  J.L.  Ivy  (1991).  Effect  of  carbohydrate  supplements  and  water  on exercise metabolism in the heat. J. Appl. Physiol. 71:680-687.

- Young,  A.J.,  M.N.  Sawka,  L.  Levine,  B.S.  Cadarette,  and  K.B.  Pandolf  (1985).  Skeletal muscle metabolism during exercise is influenced by heat acclimation. J. Appl. Physiol. 59:1929-1935.