<!-- image -->

Contents  lists  available  at ScienceDirect

## Journal  of  Science  and  Medicine  in  Sport

j o u r n a l   h o m e p a g e : www.elsevier.com/locate/jsams

Original  research

<!-- image -->

## Injury  epidemiology  in  male  and  female  competitive  diving  athletes: A  four-year  observational  study

Benjamin  M.  Currie a ,b ,c , ⁎ , Michael  Hetherington b ,  Gordon  Waddington a,d , Nicholas  A.T.  Brown a , Michael  K.  Drew a ,  Jeremy  Witchalls a , Liam  A.  Toohey a,d

- a University  of  Canberra  Research  Institute  for  Sport  and  Exercise  (UCRISE),  Australia
- b Diving  Australia,  Australia
- c Queensland  Academy  of  Sport,  Sport  Performance  Innovation  and  Knowledge,  Australia
- d Performance  Support,  Australian  Institute  of  Sport,  Australia

## a r  t i  c l  e

i  n  f  o

## a b  s t  r a  c  t

Article  history: Received  4  February  2024 Received  in  revised  form  18  July  2024 Accepted  19  August  2024 Available  online  26  August  2024

Keywords: Sports Athletes ' Wounds  and  injuries ' Aquatic Health

Objectives: To  describe  the  incidence,  severity,  burden  and  sport  speci /uniFB01 c  characteristics  of  injuries  reported  in elite  diving  athletes.

Design: Descriptive  epidemiology  study.

Methods: Medical  attention  and  time-loss  injuries  from  63  (43  female,  20  male)  Australian  national  diving gramme  athletes  were  prospectively  collected  over  four  seasons  (September  2018 -August  2022).  Injury  incidence  rates  and  burden  were  calculated,  standardised  per  365  athlete  days,  and  compared  across  groups negative  binomial  generalised  linear  models.

Results: In  total  421  injuries  were  reported  (female  =  292,  male  =  129)  at  an  injury  incidence  rate  of  2.3 con /uniFB01 dence  interval  =  2.14 -2.60)  per  365  athlete  days.  Annual  injury  prevalence  ranged  from  70.0  to  85.1  %. proximately  two-thirds  of  injuries  (67.2  %)  resulted  in  a  period  of  time-loss.  The  overall  injury  burden days  of  absence  (95  %  con /uniFB01 dence  interval  =  81 -102)  per  365  athlete  days.  Stress  fractures  in  springboard  diving athletes  incurred  the  largest  mean  days  of  time-loss  compared  to  other  injured  tissue  types.  The  majority juries  were  reported  to  occur  during  training  (79.3  %)  as  opposed  to  competition  (2.4  %),  with  more  t (55.3  %)  of  all  reported  injuries  occurring  during  pool  training  sessions.  Water  entry  (30.4  %)  or  take-of %)  were  the  most  frequently  reported  mechanism  of  injury.

Conclusions: Annual  injury  prevalence  reported  in  competitive  Australian  diving  athletes  was  found  to  be  hi Contrary  to  existing  literature,  competitive  diving  injuries  were  reported  to  occur  within  the  daily  training ronment,  with  few  injuries  occurring  during  competition.  Notable  injury  differences  between  springboard  a platform  athletes  were  observed.

©  2024  The  Authors.  Published  by  Elsevier  Ltd  on  behalf  of  S ports  Medicine  Australia.  This  is  an  open  access  article under  the  CC  BY  license  ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Practical  implications

## 1.  Introduction

- As  competitive  diving  injuries  were  reported  to  most  commonly occur  during  training  compared  to  competition,  injury  prevention strategies  should  include  interventions  that  are  implemented  within the  daily  training  environment.
- Targeting  injury  prevention  strategies  for  bone  stress  injuries  in springboard  diving  athletes  is  recommended.
- As  there  is  no  difference  in  the  rate  of  injury  incidence  between  male and  female  diving  athletes,  injury  prevention  strategies  could  be applied  at  a  universal  level  to  diving  athletes  irrespective  of  sex.

The  Olympic  sport  of  diving  is  physically  demanding  and  requires athletes  to  complete  complex  aerial  manoeuvres  before  entering  water from  either  a  3  m  springboard  or  10  m  platform. 1 Diving  athletes  undertake  a  substantial  volume  of  training  in  preparation  for  competition, which  can  lead  to  injury  and  consequently  limit  performance. 1,2 Despite the  recognised  injury  risk  associated  with  competitive  diving, 1,2 there  is limited  longitudinal  evidence  that  describes  the  injury  epidemiology  in this  athlete  population. 3,4

⁎ Corresponding  author.

Research  into  injury  in  elite  level  diving  populations  has  been  pre dominantly  limited  to  International  Benchmark  Events  where  surveillance  is  typically  conducted  over  short  one-to-two-week  durations,  or

<!-- image -->

categorised  according  to  whether  they  resulted  in  a  period  of  tim loss  from  training  and/or  competition.

All  injury  data  was  prospectively  captured  in  a  centralised  Athlete Management  System  (AMS)  database  (Smartabase,  Fusion  Sport  Pty Ltd.,  Brisbane  Australia)  by  a  sports  and  exercise  physiotherapist  or sports  and  exercise  physician  at  the  time  of  point  of  care.  Each  injury corded  was  assigned  a  four-character  injury  diagnosis  code  (Orchard Sports  Injury  Classi /uniFB01 cation  System  10.1), 16 that  detailed  the  body  site and  nature  of  the  injury  reported.  In  addition,  data  were  recorded identify  the  date  of  injury  occurrence,  date  of  injury  resolution,  and  d ration  (days)  that  the  athlete  was  unable  to  fully  participate  (time  los in  training  and/or  competition.  Speci /uniFB01 c  data  relating  to  injury  occurrence  was  captured,  including  the  training  mode  (water,  dryland, gym,  other),  mechanism  of  injury  (take-off,  water  entry,  other),  and  i the  injury  occurred  during  training  or  competition.  All  injuries  that were  reported  during  the  surveillance  period  were  included.  Data  collection  was  completed  in  accordance  with  the  guidelines  provided within  the  Australian  Institute  of  Sport  AMS  data  dictionary, 17  and study  outcomes  reported  aligned  to  the  Strengthening  of  Observational studies  in  Epidemiology -Extension  for  Sport  Injury  and  Illness  Surveillance  (STROBE-SISS)  statement. 18

studies  are  limited  to  cross-sectional  designs.  Published  injury  epidemiological  data  from  previous  Olympic  Games  suggest  that  injury  incidence  in  diving  is  low  relative  to  other  sports. 3 -5 However,  a  large percentage  of  diving  athletes  have  been  reported  to  commence  International  Benchmark  Events  with  pre-existing  injuries  that  are  not  captured  within  the  surveillance  process  (51 -56  %),  which  could  explain the  lower  injury  rates  reported  during  competitions. 6,7 Furthermore,  a survivor  bias  exists  through  the  selection  process  to  the  Olympic Games  where  typically  only  uninjured  athletes  compete. 8 A  gap  exists in  the  understanding  of  injury  epidemiology  throughout  entire  seasons, inclusive  of  training  and  competition,  as  well  as  across  multi-year  surveillance  periods  in  competitive  diving.

## 2.3.  Analysis

The  level  of  diving  injury-spe ci /uniFB01 c  detail  reported  in  multi-sports papers  is  limited.  The  body  site  and  nature  of  injury  are  commonly reported, 3,6,9 however,  the  speci /uniFB01 c  types  of  injuries  experienced  by diving  athletes  are  seldom  reported.  Recent  research  that  extended surveillance  beyond  competition  periods  also  only  reported /uniFB01 ndings speci /uniFB01 c  to  the  body  site,  nature  of  injury,  and  severity  of  injury. 10,11 Whilst  these /uniFB01 ndings  are  useful  in  identifying  frequently  injured  body sites,  for  example  the  lumbar  spine  (100  %  lifetime  prevalence), 12 shoulder  (22.7  %  period  prevalence), 6 and  wrist/hand  (85.7  %  pointprevalence), 13 they  do  little  to  establish  what  speci /uniFB01 c  types  of  injuries occur  in  competitive  diving  athletes,  nor  provide  detail  regarding  the mechanisms  or  modes  of  onset  through  which  injuries  occur.  Without these  data  available,  it  is  challenging  to  develop  targeted  injury  prevention  strategies  for  competitive  diving  that  effectively  protect  athlete health  and  mitigate  performance  reductions  associated  with  injury occurrence. 14

Therefore,  the  aims  of  this  study  were  to  (1)  describe  the  incidence, prevalence  and  burden  of  injuries  reported  by  Australian  elite  diving athletes,  (2)  describe  injury  occurrence  according  to  athlete  sex,  and (3)  describe  the  diving  speci /uniFB01 c  mechanisms  of  injury  across  four  continuous  seasons  inclusive  of  both  training  and  competition.

## 2.  Methods

## 2.1.  Study  design  and  participants

Athlete  exposure  was  quanti /uniFB01 ed  for  each  individual  athlete  using  the diving  scholarship  start  and  end  dates  (1st  September -31st  August)  for each  season.  In  circumstances  where  athletes  left  the  programme  and were  not  under  surveillance  for  the  entire  season,  left  and  right  censori was  conducted.  Descriptive  analysis  of  injury  data  was  undertaken  with results  reported  as  frequencies  and  proportions.  These  data  are  presented  according  to  athlete  sex  and  across  each  season  of  surveillance.  I jury  incidence  rates  (IIRs)  were  calculated  using  the  following  formula: the  number  of  injuries  /  exposure  in  athlete  days  ×  365,  with  95  %  CI culated.  Negative  binominal  generalised  linear  models  that  included  a random  effect  for  athlete  and /uniFB01 tted  with  a  logarithm  link  function  were used  to  compare  IIRs  between  male  and  female  athletes  using  incidenc rate  ratios,  with  an  incidence  rate  ratio  considered  statistically  signi /uniFB01 cant where  the  95  %  CI  did  not  include  1.0.  To  establish  a  clear  understan of  the  impact  of  injury  on  the  ability  to  train,  injury  burden  was  qu /uniFB01 ed  as  the  product  of  the  time-loss  IIR  and  mean  days  of  time-loss. statistical  analyses  were  performed  in  Stata  (Stata/SE  16.1,  StataCorp., USA).

Sixty-three  individual  athletes  (43  female,  20  male)  were  eligible across the  four-season  surveillance  period.  Almost  half  (47.6  %)  of the  athletes  participated  across  all  four  seasons,  20.6  %  three  seasons 15.9 %  two  seasons,  and  15.9  %  one  season.  A  total  of  188  athlete sons,  57  male  athlete  seasons,  (mean  age  =  18.7,  range  =  10  to and  131  female  athlete  seasons  (mean  age  18.3,  range  =  10  to  2 equivalent  to  a  total  of  65,206  athlete  days  ( Table  1 )  were  included  for analysis.

Athletes  in  the  national  Diving  Australia  programme  were  followed prospectively  over  four  consecutive  12-month  seasons,  from  1  September  2018  to  31  August  2022.  Australian  competitive  diving  athletes  are based  within  one  of /uniFB01 ve  national  training  centres  across  Australia, with  occasional  domestic  travel  for  training  camps  or  competition required.  In  addition,  athletes  travel  internationally  for  competitions (FINA  Grand  Prix,  Final  World  Series,  FINA  World  Cup,  FINA  World Championships,  and  Olympic  Games)  dependent  on  their  ability  to qualify  and/or  be  selected  for  these  events.  Athletes  in  the  national Diving  Australia  programme  typically  complete  25 -30  h  of  training per  week,  including  approximately  200  somersaults  in  dryland  training and  between  450  and  700  water  entries  per  week.  Athletes  were ineligible  if  they  did  not  reside  in  Australia  for  each  season  (e.g.,  they attended  college  in  the  USA)  as  they  were  not  under  continuous surveillance.  Ethics  approval  was  granted  by  the  Australian  Institute  of Sport  Ethics  Committee  (approval  number  20200205.R2),  with  crossinstitutional  ethics  approval  granted  by  the  University  of  Canberra Human  Research  Ethics  Committee  (approval  number  6905). 3.  Results

## 2.2.  Injury  de /uniFB01 nitions  and  data  collection

1.22,  p

-

Injury  was  de /uniFB01 ned  in  accordance  with  the  medical  attention  de /uniFB01 nition  outlined  in  the  FINA  consensus  statement  on  the  methodology  of injury  and  illness  surveillance  as ' a  physical  complaint  or  observable damage  to  body  tissue  produced  by  the  transfer  of  energy  experienced or  sustained  by  an  athlete  during  participation  in  training  or  competing in  an  aquatic  discipline,  where  a  quali /uniFB01 ed  clinician  assessed  the  athlete's  medical  condition ' . 15 Medical  attention  injuries  were  also  sub-

Four  hundre d  and  twenty-one  medical  attention  injuries  were  reported  (female  =  292,  male  =  129),  at  an  IIR  of  2.36  (95  %  CI  = 2.60)  injuries  per  365  athlete  days.  An  increasing  trend  was  observe in  the  medical  attention  IIR  across  each  successive  season,  ranging from  2.04  (2018 -19)  to  2.59  (2021 -22),  however,  this  was  not  statisti cally  signi /uniFB01 cant  (incidence  rate  ratio  =  1.09,  95  %  CI  =  0.97 0.161).  The  median  number  of  days  spent  injured  per  injury  was  3 with  an  inter-quartile  range  (IQR)  of  15 -95.  Of  the  421  injuries,  2 (67.2 %)  resulted  in  a  period  of  time-loss  from  training  or  competiti occurring  at  an  IIR  of  1.58  (95  %  CI  =  1.41 -1.78)  per  365  athlete The  median  number  of  time-loss  days  per  injury  was  17  (IQR  = 56).  The  overall  injury  burden  for  the  surveillance  period  was  90.8 days  of  absence  (95  %  CI  =  81 -102)  per  365  athlete  days.

Table  1

22).

21,  2021

-

-

-

20,  2020

19,  2019

Distribution  of  injuries  across  four  scholarship  seasons  (2018

-

dence  interval;  &gt;  greater  than.

con

/uniFB01

n  =  number;  %  =  percentage;  IQ

R  =  interquartile  range;  CI  =

<!-- image -->

Injuries  per  365  athlete  days.

a

Days  of  absence  per  365  athlete  days.

b

Sub-categories  for  injury  severity  are  for  time-loss  injuries  only.

c

The most frequently  reported  body  site  injured  was  the  lumbar  spine (n  =  77;  18.3  %),  followed  by  the  wrist  and  hand  (n  =  49;  11.6  %), shoulder  (n  =  44;  10.5  %),  and  neck  (n  =  37;  8.8  %).  Of  the  283  timeloss  injuries  reported,  the  lumbar  spine  (n  =  58,  20.5  %),  wrist  and hand  (n  =  33,  11.7  %)  and  shoulder  (n  =  27,  9.5  %)  accounted  for  two /uniFB01 fths  of  all  time-loss  injuries.  Injuries  reported  to  the  head  (n  =  12/15; 80.0  %),  trunk  and  abdomen  (n  =  7/9;  77.8  %),  foot  (n  =  14/18; 77.8  %),  and  lumbar  spine  (n  =  58/77;  75.3  %)  were  the  body  sites with  the  highest  proportion  of  time-loss  injuries.  The  most  burdensome injuries  according  to  body  site  were  the  lumbar  spine  (n  =  21.4,  95  % CI  =  16.5 -27.7),  wrist  and  hand  (n  =  17.6,  95  %  CI  =  12.5 -24.8),  and shoulder  (n  =  10.0,  95  %  CI  =  6.9 -14.6).  When  considering  the  speci /uniFB01 c clinical  diagnostic  codes  allocated  by  the  health  professionals,  lumbar spine  facet  joint  pain/stiffness  (n  =  21,  5.0  %),  triceps  muscle  strain  (n =  17, 4.0 %), wrist (radiocarpal joint) sprain (n =  16, 3.8 %), posteromedial  shin  periostitis  (n  =  13,  3.1  %),  and  concussion  (n  =  8, 1.9  %)  were  the  most  frequently  reported.

With  respect  to  the  speci /uniFB01 c  tissue  injured,  almost  a  quarter  of  all injuries  were  reported  as  joint  sprains  (n  =  105;  24.9  %),  followed  by muscle  injuries  (n  =  91,  21.6  %),  and  impingement  type  injuries  (n  = 57,  13.5  %).  Joint  sprains  (n  =  72,  25.5  %),  muscle  injuries  (n  =  55, 19.5  %),  and  impingement  type  injuries  (n  =  34,  12.1  %)  were  also  the most  common  reported  type  of  time  loss  injuries  (Appendix  A).  Injury burden  according  to  body  site  and  tissue  type  was  highest  in  wrist joint  injuries  ( Fig.  1 ).

<!-- image -->

Considering  athlete  sex,  over  the  4-year  surveillance  period,  129 injuries  were  reported  for  male  athletes  at  an  IIR  of  2.30  (95  %  CI  = 1.94 -2.73)  per  365  athlete  days,  whilst  292  injuries  were  reported  for female  athletes  at  an  IIR  of  2.38  (95  %  CI  =  2.12 -2.67)  per  365  athlete days.  The  IIR  between  female  and  male  athletes  was  comparable  (incidence  rate  ratio  =  0.97;  95  %  CI  =  0.73 -1.27,  p  =  0.807).  The  injury burden  was  similar  between  males  (95.31  days  of  absence  [95  %  CI  = 77.06 -117.89]  per  365  athlete  days)  and  females  (89.07  days  of  absence [95  %  CI  =  77.66 -102.42]  per  365  athlete  days).  The  most  frequently  reported  body  sites  injured  were  similar  across  athlete  sexes.  For  males, injuries  were  most  frequently  reported  at  the  lumbar  spine  (n  =  22; 17.1  %),  wrist  and  hand  (n  =  18;  14.0  %),  shoulder  (n  =  15;  11.6  %), and  knee  (n  =  15;  11.6  %),  whereas  in  females  the  lumbar  spine  (n  = 55;  18.8  %),  wrist  and  hand  (n  =  31;  10.6  %),  lower  leg  (n  =  31;  10.6  %), and  shoulder  (n  =  29;  9.9  %)  were  most  frequently  reported.

Injury  occurrence  varied  according  to  the  different  diving  disciplines.  Athletes  participating  in  the  10  m  platform  discipline  were  the most  likely  to  be  injured,  with  202  injuries  reported  at  an  IIR  of  3.02, 95  %  CI  =  2.63 -3.47  per  365  athlete  days.  The  reported  IIRs  were lower  in  both  the  3  m  springboard  discipline  (IIR  =  2.20,  95  %  CI  = 1.90 -2.55),  and  in  the  group  of  athletes  who  competed  in  both  the 3  m  springboard  and  10  m  platform  (IIR  =  1.30,  0.95 -1.79).  Springboard  and  platform  diving  athletes  were  most  likely  to  report  an injury  to  the  lumbar  spine;  however,  platform  diving  athletes  had  a higher  IIR  to  the  wrist  and  hand,  shoulder,  and  upper  arm,  compared to  springboard  diving  athletes  who  had  a  higher  IIR  to  the  knee  and lower  leg  ( Fig.  2 ).  Springboard  diving  athletes  who  reported  a  stress fracture  suffered  the  greatest  mean  days  of  time  loss  compared  to any  other  tissue  type  ( Fig.  2 ).

Fig.  1. Injury  burden  in  competitive  diving  athletes  by  (A)  body  site,  (B)  tissue  type,  an (C)  body  site  and  tissue  type.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Almost  all  injuries  occurred  within  the  daily  training  environment (n  =  373,  88.6  %),  with  competition  environments  featuring  the  least (n  =  24,  5.7  %).  Injuries  related  to  diving  practice  sessions  (n  =  334) were  reported  substantially  more  often  compared  to  in-competition  injuries  (n  =  10).  A  small  number  of  injuries  were  reported  to  occur  during  weight  training  sessions  (n  =  20,  4.8  %),  warm-up  activities  (n  =  15, 3.6  %),  and  during  competition  (n  =  10,  2.4  %).  Of  the  sport  speci /uniFB01 c  diving  activity  details  recorded,  59.3  %  (n  =  233)  of  injuries  were  reported as  occurring  during  pool/water  training,  11.2  %  (n  =  44)  during  dryland training,  and  9.7  %  (n  =  38)  from  weight  training  and  conditioning.  The mechanism  of  injury  was  most  frequently  reported  as  either  water entry  (30.4  %),  or  the  take-off  phase  of  the  dive  (27.8  %).  ( Table  2 )

<!-- image -->

diagnoses  in  competitive  diving  athletes,  the  injury  severity  and  burden, and  that  injuries  in  diving  athletes  occur  substantially  more  in  trainin than  in  competition.  The  study  further  identi /uniFB01 ed  that  injuries  in  diving athletes  most  commonly  occur  to  the  lumbar  spine,  wrist,  and  shoulder that  injuries  most  commonly  occur  in  pool/water  related  diving  activity, and  the  rate  of  injuries  was  found  to  be  higher  in  platform  compare springboard  diving  athletes.

This  study  identi /uniFB01 ed  injury  burden  in  competitive  diving  athletes  to be  high.  Reported  injury  burden  in  this  study  was  more  than  two  tim that reported across multiple sports within an Australian sports academy. 19 Within  this  study,  the  lumbar  spine,  and  wrist/hand  body sites  were  identi /uniFB01 ed  to  have  high  injury  burden  in  both  springboard and  platform  diving  disciplines.  Development  of  prevention  strategies targeting  these  body  sites  should  be  considered  to  reduce  injury  burde in  competitive  diving.

<!-- image -->

Injury  occurrence  in  competitive  diving  has  previously  been  reported  as  low;  however,  results  from  the  present  study  suggest  tha could  be  a  result  of  reporting  bias,  with  almost  all  data  reported  on  c petition  only  surveillance  periods.  The  present  study  identi /uniFB01 ed  that  diving  athletes  are  often  injured,  with  injuries  most  commonly  reported during  diving  training  sessions  compared  to  in-competition,  which likely  relates  to  greater  training  exposure  for  the  development  of  ne skills.  Consistent  with  previous  literature  from  cohort  studies  at  multisport  events,  new  injuries  during  competition  were  not  common  in this  cohort.  Interestingly,  when  the  type  of  injury  activity  data  is  exa ined,  two  and  a  half  times  as  many  injuries  were  reported  to  occu weight  training  compared  to  competition.  These /uniFB01 ndings  contrast with  previous  literature  that  reports  injuries  in  diving  are  infrequent and  suggest  that  whilst  diving  athletes  are  less  likely  to  sustain  an  inj within  competition  surveillance  periods,  injuries  do  frequently  occur  in the  daily  training  environment.  It  has  been  previously  reported  that  div ing athletes present to competition with pre-existing injuries, supporting  the  notion  that  diving  athletes  sustain  injuries  during  training,  and  that  these  injuries  impair  training  performance  in  the  lead-u to  competition. 6,7 Developing  a  deeper  understanding  of  how  and  why injuries  occur  in  training,  and  establishing  the  impact  that  injury  an athlete  availability  for  training  has  on  performance  would  provide  an opportunity  to  develop  targeted  interventions  to  reduce  training  related injuries.

The  lumbar  spine  was  reported  as  the  body  site  with  the  highest jury  incidence  in  diving  athletes,  consistent  with  the  literature.  The present  study  further  identi /uniFB01 ed  that,  whilst  being  the  most  frequent body  site  injured,  the  nature  of  lumbar  spine  injuries  in  competitive  di ing  athletes  varies,  as  does  the  impact  on  athlete  availability.  For  exa ple,  lumbar  joint  pain  and/or  stiffness  was  the  most  frequently  reporte lumbar  spine  injury,  yet  other  injuries  to  the  lumbar  spine  such  as  lu bar  joint  sprain  and  lumbar  bone  stress  fracture  carried  higher  injury  s verity.  Recent  literature  from  other  sports  suggests  that  less  severe injuries  with  no  associated  time  loss  can  lead  to  subsequent  time  lo injuries. 20 In  order  to  assess  and  develop  strategies  to  counter  this  pro cess  within  diving  athletes,  sporting  organisations  should  ensure  quality injury  surveillance  that  enables  health  providers  to  record  all  injuries and  monitor  both  non  time-loss  and  time-loss  injuries.

Fig.  2. Injury  burden  in  competitive  diving  athletes  by  diving  discipline  and  (A)  body  site, and  (B)  tissue  type.

## 4.  Discussion

This  is  the /uniFB01 rst  study  of  male  and  female  competitive  diving  athletes to  report  on  injury  prevalence,  incidence,  and  burden,  and  provide  comparisons  between  training  and  competition,  diving  discipline  and  mechanism  of  injury  in  an  elite  athlete  cohort.  This  study  identi /uniFB01

ed  injury The  results  from  the  present  study  con /uniFB01 rm the outcomes  of  previous research  that  upper  extremity  injuries  are  common  in  competitive  diving  athletes  and  contribute  considerable  time  loss.  This  is  consistent with  existing  cohort  studies  in  Olympic  Games 3 -5  and  FINA  World Championships. 6,7,9 The  upper  extremity  is  susceptible  to  injury  as diving  athletes  fall  at  a  speed  close  to  60  km/h,  breaking  the  wa with  their  hands  (both  wrists  and  elbows  in  full  extension)  to  ent the  water,  with  the  athlete  experiencing  a  sudden  decrease  in  velocit of  53  %  within  milliseconds  of  water  entry. 2,13 This  adopted  hand  position  minimises  the  amount  of  splash,  but  results  in  forceful  wrist  exte sion  that  causes  injuries  at  the  wrist  and  hand. 21 Rapid  joint  movements of  shoulder  abduction  and  internal  rotation  occur  under  the  water,  plac ing signi /uniFB01 cant joint torques on the upper extremity. 13 Targeted

prevention  strategies  should  be  designed  and  implemented  with  the aim  of  reducing  the  incidence  of  upper  extremity  injuries  in  diving  athletes.  It  has  been  suggested  that  strength  training  exercises  aimed  at  the rotator  cuff  may  help  in  the  prevention  of  shoulder  injuries  in  overhead female  athletes, 22 whilst  a  primary  prevention  strategy,  such  as  protective  equipment  in  the  form  of  wrist  guards/braces  could  reduce  the  incidence of wrist and hand injuries, 23  and secondary prevention strategies  aimed  at  early  identi /uniFB01 cation  and  intervention  could  be  investigated  to  reduce  the  injury  severity  and  injury  burden  of  triceps  muscle strains. 24

Research  into  the  epidemiology  of  sport-related  concussion  has  continued  to  increase  over  recent  years.  This  study  identi /uniFB01 sion  does  occur  in  competitive  diving  athletes,  contributing  1.9  %  (n  = 8)  of  injuries  reported  within  this  athlete  cohort.  To  date,  only  two  studies  have  previously  reported  concussion  in  a  diving  population,  with both  studies  having  small  athlete  sample  sizes  and  a  small  number  of concussions  reported.  The  incidence  proportion  of  concussion  in  competitive  diving  athletes  has  been  reported  as  high  as  8.1  %  in  collegiate level  female  athletes. 10 Established  return  to  play  protocols  for  concussion  suggest  that  all  diagnosed  concussions  require  a  period  of  no  training  and/or  competition,  thus  all  become  classi /uniFB01 ed  as  time-loss  injuries with  periods  between  7  and  14  days. 25 Whilst  evidence  concerning  concussion  continues  to  emerge,  understanding  of  how  often  it  occurs  in different  sporting  populations  remains  important.  Further  research into  the  causative  factors  of  concussion  injuries  in  competitive  diving athletes  is  required  to  help  guide  preventative  strategies.

Notable  differences  in  injury  pro /uniFB01 les  between  the  3  m  springboard and  10  m  platform  diving  disciplines  were  identi /uniFB01 e in  the  present ed  that  concuss udy.  Injury  incidence  rates  were  35  %  higher  in  athletes  competin in  the  10  m  platform  discipline  than  those  competing  in  the  3  m  spri board  discipline,  whilst  also  identifying  that  bone  stress  injuries  were found  to  have  the  highest  discipline  speci /uniFB01 c  injury  burden  in  springboard  diving  athletes.  Despite  there  only  being  a  small  number  of  ca studies  that  have  provided  evidence  for  the  types  of  injuries  speci /uniFB01 c to either  diving  discipline  previously, 26 -28 the  present  study  con /uniFB01 rms  the /uniFB01 ndings  that  lower  limb  injuries  are  common  in  springboard  diving athletes, 27 whereas  platform  diving  athletes  are  more  likely  to  sustain an  injury  to  the  upper  limb. 26,28 It  has  been  suggested  that  the  repetitive,  high  energy,  axial  loading  during  training  and  competing  in  th springboard  diving  discipline  may  lead  to  joint  forces  being  dissipated through  the  lower  limb,  causing  more  lower  limb  overuse  injuries  i springboard  diving  athletes. 27 Forces  attenuated  by  the  upper  limb  and lumbar  spine  may  be  increased  by  the  dive  height,  with  large  joint  tor forces  acting  on  the  wrist  and  hand,  and  lumbar  spine  at  the  poin water  entry. 29 Given  this  research  has  found  that  injuries  occur  in  athlet s  competing  in  the  10  m  platform  diving  discipline  at  1.35  times their  springboard  diving  peers,  targeted  interventions  to  reduce  the most  common  injuries  in  10  m  platform  diving  athletes  should  b prioritised.  Interventions  aimed  at  reducing  bone  stress  injuries  in  diving athletes  could  be  designed  at  a  group  level  for  springboard  diving  at letes,  and  these  could  include  approaches  to  monitoring  training  load and  athlete  exposure,  nutritional  support,  and  further  assessment  of  all health  problems  that  contribute  to  poor  bone  health  in  athletes.  As  t lumbar  spine  is  the  most  common  injured  body  site  in  both  springboa and  platform  diving  athletes,  injury  prevention  interventions  could  be applied  across  each  diving  discipline  to  streamline  implementation.

## Table  2

Frequency  and  proportion  of  injuries  reported  by  diving  athletes  by  injury  activity,  training type,  diving  injury  activity,  diving  discipline,  and  mechanism  of  injury.

|                                 | No. of injuries (%)          | No. of injuries (%)   | No. of injuries (%)   | No. of injuries (%)   | No. of injuries (%)   |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
|                                 | 2018 - 19                    | 2019 - 20             | 2020 - 21             | 2021 - 22             | Total                 |
| General injury onset a          |                              |                       |                       |                       |                       |
| Overuse                         | 45 (54.22)                   | 64 (60.95)            | 61 (62.59)            | 65 (55.56)            | 235 (55.82)           |
| Traumatic                       | 27 (32.53)                   | 26 (24.76)            | 52 (44.83)            | 51 (43.59)            | 156 (37.05)           |
| Other                           | 11 (13.25)                   | 15 (14.29)            | 3 (2.59)              | 1 (0.85)              | 30 (7.13)             |
| Injury activity a               |                              |                       |                       |                       |                       |
| Training                        | 66 (79.52)                   | 85 (80.95)            | 99 (85.34)            | 84 (71.79)            | 334 (79.33)           |
| Competition                     | 4 (4.82)                     | 2 (1.90)              | 0 (0.00)              | 4 (3.42)              | 10 (2.38)             |
| Other                           | 9 (10.84)                    | 10 (9.52)             | 8 (6.90)              | 15 (12.82)            | 42 (9.98)             |
| Warm-up                         | 2 (2.41)                     | 2 (1.90)              | 5 (4.31)              | 6 (5.13)              | 15 (3.56)             |
| Weight training                 | 2 (2.41)                     | 6 (5.71)              | 4 (3.45)              | 8 (6.84)              | 20 (4.75)             |
| General location a              |                              |                       |                       |                       |                       |
| Training                        | 71 (85.54)                   | 94 (89.52)            | 110 (94.83)98         | (83.76)               | 373 (88.60)           |
| Competition                     | 9 (10.84)                    | 5 (4.76)              | 2 (1.72)              | 8 (6.84)              | 24 (5.70)             |
| Other                           | 3 (3.61)                     | 6 (5.71)              | 4 (3.45)              | 11 (9.40)             | 24 (5.70)             |
| Diving injury activity b        |                              |                       |                       |                       |                       |
| Pool/water training             | 38 (69.09)                   | 60 (57.14)            | 69 (59.48)            | 66 (56.41)            | 233 (59.29)           |
| Dryland                         | 7 (12.73)                    | 9 (8.57)              | 16 (13.79)            | 12 (10.26)            | 44 (11.20)            |
| Weight training & conditioning  | 3 (5.45)                     | 9 (8.57)              | 13 (11.21)            | 13 (11.11)            | 38 (9.67)             |
| Other                           | 7 (12.73)                    | 27 (25.71)            | 18 (15.52)            | 26 (22.22)            | 78 (19.85)            |
| Diving discipline a             |                              |                       |                       |                       |                       |
| Platform                        | 45 (54.22)                   | 49 (46.67)            | 59 (50.86)            | 49 (41.88)            | 202 (47.98)           |
| Springboard                     | 32 (38.55)                   | 46 (43.81)            | 48 (41.38)            | 55 (47.01)            | 181 (42.99)           |
| Both (springboard and platform) | 6 (7.23)                     | 10 (9.52)             | 9 (7.76)              | 13 (11.11)            | 38 (9.03)             |
| Diving mechanism of injury c    | Diving mechanism of injury c |                       |                       |                       |                       |
| Water (take off)                | 16 (32.00)                   | 24 (22.86)            | 29 (25.00)            | 39 (33.33)            | 108 (27.84)           |
| Water (entry)                   | 17 (34.00)                   | 31 (29.52)            | 40 (34.48)            | 32 (27.35)            | 120 (30.93)           |
| Other                           | 17 (34.00)                   | 50 (47.62)            | 47 (40.52)            | 46 (39.32)            | 160 (41.24)           |

a %  of  overall  injuries  n  =  421.

b %  of  393  injuries.

c %  of  388  injuries.

wate

Understanding  mechanisms  of  injury  in  competitive  diving  athletes had  yet  to  be  explored  in  the  literature.  The  dive  is  often  broken three  components:  take-off  (approach),  aerial  manoeuvre,  and  water entry.  Our  results  reported  that  more  than  50  %  of  injuries  reported  d ing  pool  sessions  occurred  during  either  the  take-off  or  water  entr phase of the dive. Existing case studies suggest that the entry 30 -32 and  take-off 27 phases  are  common  phases  for  injury  to occur  in  competitive  diving  athletes.  Diving  athletes  complete  high numbers  of  training  dives,  most  of  which  load  their  hands  on  entry the  water,  with  previous  work  identifying  an  increase  in  wrist  an hand  injuries  with  a /uniFB02 at  hand  in  full  wrist  extension. 13 Biomechanical analysis  of  water  entry  positions  has  identi /uniFB01 ed  that  this  wrist  positio creates  an  area  in  the  water  for  the  body  to  move  through  that  red the  amount  of  created  splash  from  the  dive,  thus  improving  perfor mance  outcomes. 33 Future  research  investigating  the  mechanism  of  injury  in  competitive  diving  athletes  needs  to  be  conducted  to  understan how  factors  such  as,  the  board  height,  hurdle-leg,  differing  take-off  ap proaches,  the  direction  of  the  rotation/twist,  and  the  direction  of  th dive  (dive  type)  might  contribute  to  injury.

Capturing  quality  athlete  exposure  level  data  in  diving  is  dif /uniFB01 cult.  It is  noted  that  the  use  of  athlete  attendance/scholarship  days  as  a  mea sure  of  athlete  exposure  has  limitations.  A  range  of  measures  of  athle exposure  have  been  described  in  the  literature,  including  training hours, 11 and  number  of  completed  training  sessions. 10 Future  research is  required  to  de /uniFB01 ne  and  validate  re /uniFB01 ned  measures  to  quantify  divin exposure.  This  study  only  included  injuries  that  were  recorded  in  th AMS by the treating  sports  and  exercise  physician  and  physiotherapists. Whilst  the  use  of  a  medical  attention  de /uniFB01 nition  allows  for  re /uniFB01 ned  dia nostic  information  to  be  captured,  it  is  acknowledged  that  athletes  ma not  have  presented  to  a  medical  practitioner  for  minor  injuries  an hence  these  would  not  have  been  recorded  and  included  in  the  stud

## 5.  Conclusion

This  study  provides  new  evidence  that  enables  injury  prevention strategies  to  be  designed  to  target  the  most  commonly  occurring  inju ries  within  each  competitive  diving  discipline.  The /uniFB01 ndings  of  this study  contrast  to  previous  literature  that  suggests  injury  occurrence  in

4. Soligard  T,  Steffen  K,  Palmer  D  et  al.  Sports  injury  and  illness  incidence  in  the  Ri Janeiro  2016  Olympic  Summer  Games:  a  prospective  study  of  11274  athletes  from 207  countries. Br  J  Sports  Med 2017;51:1265-1271.
5. Junge  A,  Engebretsen  L,  Mountjoy  ML  et  al.  Sports  injuries  during  the  Summer  Olymp Games  2008. Am  J  Sports  Med 2009;37:2165-2172.
6. Mountjoy  M,  Junge  A,  Benjamen  S  et  al.  Competing  with  injuries:  injuries  prior  to  a during  the  15th  FINA  World  Championships  2013  (aquatics). Br  J  Sports  Med 2015;49:37-43.

diving  is  low,  with  more  than  seven  out  of  ten  diving  athletes  reported being  injured  each  season.  Injuries  related  to  diving  training  sessions were  reported  substantially  more  often  compared  to  in-competition. Notable  differences  in  the  injury  pro /uniFB01 le  between  platform  and  springboard  competitive  diving  athletes  were  observed,  which  warrants  consideration  for  the  future  development  of  injury  prevention  strategies.

## Funding  information

7. Prien  A,  Mountjoy  M,  Miller  J  et  al.  Injury  and  illness  in  aquatic  sport:  how  high  i risk?  A  comparison  of  results  from  three  FINA  World  Championships. Br  J  Sports  Med 2017;51:277-282.

This  research  did  not  receive  any  speci /uniFB01 c  grant  from  funding  agencies  in  the  public,  commercial,  or  not-for-pro /uniFB01 t sectors.

8. Currie  BM,  Drew  MK,  Hetherington  M  et  al.  Diving  into  the  health  problems  of  co petitive  divers:  a  systematic  review  of  injuries  and  illnesses  in  pre-elite  and  elite  di ing  athletes. Sports  Health  Multidiscipl  Appr 2024.  doi:10.1177/19417381241255329.

## Con /uniFB01 rmation  of  ethical  compliance

9. Mountjoy  M,  Junge  A,  Alonso  JM  et  al.  Sports  injuries  and  illnesses  in  the  2009  F World  Championships  (Aquatics). Br  J  Sports  Med 2010;44:522-527.
10. Kerr  ZY,  Baugh  CM,  Hibberd  EE  et  al.  Epidemiology  of  national  collegiate  athletic  a sociation  men ' s  and  women ' s  swimming  and  diving  injuries  from  2009/2010  to 2013/2014. Br  J  Sports  Med 2015;49:465-471.
11. Kim  HC,  Park  KJ.  Injuries  in  male  and  female  elite  aquatic  sports  athletes:  an  8-y prospective,  epidemiological  study. J  Sports  Sci  Med 2020;19:390-396.
12. Baranto  A,  Hellstrom  M,  Nyman  R  et  al.  Back  pain  and  degenerative  abnormalities  i the  spine  of  young  elite  divers:  a  5-year  follow-up  magnetic  resonance  imaging study. Knee  Surg  Sports  Traumatol  Arthrosc 2006;14:907-914.

Ethics  approval  for  this  study  was  granted  by  the  Australian  Institute of  Sport  Ethics  Committee  (approval  number  20200205.R2),  with  crossinstitutional  ethics  approval  granted  by  the  University  of  Canberra Human  Research  Ethics  Committee  (approval  number  6905).

## CRediT  authorship  contribution  statement

13. le  Viet  DT,  Lantieri  LA,  Loy  SM.  Wrist  and  hand  injuries  in  platform  diving. J  Hand  Surg Am 1993;18:876-880.
14. Drew  MK,  Raysmith  BP,  Charlton  PC.  Injuries  impair  the  chance  of  successful  perfor mance  by  sportspeople:  a  systematic  review. Br  J  Sports  Med 2017;51:1209-1214.
15. Mountjoy  M,  Junge  A,  Alonso  JM  et  al.  Consensus  statement  on  the  methodology injury  and  illness  surveillance  in  FINA  (aquatic  sports). Br  J  Sports  Med 2016;50: 590-596.
16. Rae  K,  Orchard  J.  The  Orchard  Sports  Injury  Classi /uniFB01 cation  System  (OSICS)  Version  10. Clin  J  Sport  Med 2007;17:201-204.
17. Australian  Institute  of  Sport. The  De /uniFB01 nitions  and  Use  of  the  Injury  Record  Within  the Athlete  Management  System:  Data  Dictionary  Version  2.1,  Version  2.1  ed., Canberra, Australia,  Australian  Sports  Commission,  2020.

BC:  Conceptualisation,  Methodology,  Investigation,  Software,  Data curation,  Writing -Original  draft  preparation;  MH:  Conceptualisation, Writing -Reviewing  and  editing;  GW:  Conceptualisation,  Writing -Reviewing  and  editing;  NB:  Writing -Reviewing  and  editing;  MD:  Conceptualisation, Writing -Reviewing  and  editing; JW:  Writing -Reviewing  and  editing;  LT:  Conceptualisation,  Software,  Visualisation, Supervision,  Writing -Reviewing  and  editing.

## Declaration  of  interest  statement

18. Bahr  R,  Clarsen  B,  Derman  W  et  al.  International  Olympic  Committee  consensus  state ment:  methods  for  recording  and  reporting  of  epidemiological  data  on  injury  and  ill ness in sport  2020  (including  STROBE  Extension  for  Sport  Injury  and  Illness Surveillance  (STROBE-SIIS)). Br  J  Sports  Med 2020;54:372-389.
19. Sheehy  DJ,  Toohey  LA,  Panagodage  Perera  NK  et  al.  Despite  maintaining  a  high  dai training  availability,  a quarter  of  athletes  start  the  season  injured  and  three  quarters experience  injury  in  an  Australian  State  Academy  of  Sport. J  Sci  Med  Sport 2022;25: 139-145.
20. Whalan  M,  Lovell  R,  Sampson  JA.  Do  niggles  matter? -increased  injury  risk  following physical  complaints  in  football  (soccer). Sci  Med  Footb 2020;4:216-224.
21. Haase  SC.  Management  of  upper  extremity  injury  in  divers. Hand  Clin 2017;33:73-80.

The  authors  declare  the  following /uniFB01 ancial  interests/personal  relationships  which  may  be  considered  as  potential  competing  interests: Co-author  previously  was  the  editor-in-chief  at  the  journal  to  which we are submitting.  If  there  are  other  authors,  they  declare  that  they  have no  known  competing /uniFB01 nancial  interests  or  personal  relationships  that could  have  appeared  to  in /uniFB02 uence  the  work  reported  in  this  paper.

## Acknowledgements

22. Niederbracht  Y,  Shim  AL,  Sloniger  MA  et  al.  Effects  of  a  shoulder  injury  preventio strength  training  program  on  eccentric  external  rotator  muscle  strength  and glenohumeral  joint  imbalance  in  female  overhead  activity  athletes. J  Strength  Cond Res 2008;22:140-145.
23. Hagel  B,  Pless  IB,  Goulet  C.  The  effect  of  wrist  guard  use  on  upper-extremity  injur in  snowboarders. Am  J  Epidemiol 2005;162:149-156.
24. Wollin  M,  Thorborg  K,  Drew  M  et  al.  A  novel  hamstring  strain  injury  prevention  s tem:  post-match  strength  testing  for  secondary  prevention  in  football. Br  J  Sports  Med 2020;54:498-499.
25. McCrory  P,  Meeuwisse  W,  Dvorak  J  et  al.  Con sensus  statement  on  concussion  in  sport -the  5th  international  conference  on  concussion  in  sport  held  in  Berlin,  Octobe  2016. Br  J Sports  Med 2017;51:838-847.
26. Berkoff  D,  Boggess  B.  Carpal  contusions  in  an  elite  platform  diver. BMJ  Case  Rep 2011;2011.
27. Edler  JR,  Games  KE,  Eberman  LE  et  al.  An  impacted  tibial  plateau  fracture  in  an lescent  diver:  a  case  report. Int  J  Athl  Ther  Train 2016;21:21-25.

The  authors  thank  the  sports  and  exercise  physicians  and  physiotherapists  that  work  with  Diving  Australia  programmes  for  the  collection  of  injury  records  used  within  this  research.  We  also  acknowledge Diving  Australia,  the  Queensland  Academy  of  Sport,  the  University of  Canberra  for  the  scholarship  awarded  to  the  lead  author  (BC),  and the  Australian  Institute  of  Sport  for  the  in-kind  support  provided  to the  research  team.

## Appendices.  Supplementary  data

28. Mohamed  Ha /uniFB02 ah  NH,  Mat  Nor  NF,  Abdullah  S  et  al.  Bilateral  scaphoid  stress  fractur in  a  platform  diver  presenting  with  unilateral  symptoms. Singapore  Med  J 2014;55: e159-e161.

Supplementary  data  to  this  article  can  be  found  online  at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jsams.2024.08.204.

## References

1. Jones  NS.  Competitive  diving  principles  and  injuries. Curr  Sports  Med  Rep 2017;16: 351-356.
29. Harrison  SM,  Cohen  RCZ,  Cleary  PW  et  al.  A  coupled  biomechanical-Smoothed  Particle  Hydrodynamics  model  for  predicting  the  loading  on  the  body  during  elite  plat form  diving. App  Math  Model 2016;40:3812-3831.
30. Badman  BL,  Rechtine  GR.  Spinal  injury  considerations  in  the  competitive  diver:  a  cas report  and  review  of  the  literature. Spine  J 2004;4:584-590.
31. Chandra  V,  Little  C,  Lee  JT.  Thoracic  outlet  syndrome  in  high-performance  athletes. J Vasc  Surg 2014;60:1012-1018.
2. Rubin  BD.  The  basics  of  competitive  diving  and  its  injuries. Clin  Sports  Med 1999;18: 293-303.
32. Waninger  KN.  Stress  fracture  of  the  clavicle  in  a  collegiate  diver. Clin  J  Sport  Med 1997;7:66-68.
33. Pandey  A,  Yuk  J,  Chang  B  et  al.  Slamming  dynamics  of  diving  and  its  implications diving-related  injuries. Sci  Adv 2022;8:eabo5888.
3. Engebretsen  L,  Soligard  T,  Steffen  K  et  al.  Sports  injuries  and  illnesses  during  the  London  Summer  Olympic  Games  2012. Br  J  Sports  Med 2013;47:407-414.