## Injury Patterns in Division I Collegiate Swimming

Brian R. Wolf,* † MD, MS, Alexander E. Ebinger, † Michael P . Lawler, ‡ MA, ATC, LAT, and Carla L. Britton, †  MS †

From the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Iowa Hospital and Clinics, and the ‡ Department of Athletics, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa

Background: In the last 25 years, it is estimated that over 42,000 male and female swimmers have competed at the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I-A level. Despite the magnitude of these numbers, little is known about the epidemiology of collegiate swimming injuries.

Purpose: To describe the pattern of injuries incurred for one NCAA Division I collegiate men's and women's swimming team over 5 seasons.

Study Design: Descriptive epidemiology study.

Methods: Musculoskeletal and head injuries reported in the Sports Injury Management System for a Division I swimming team from 2002-2007 were identified. Gender, body part, year of eligibility, position, stroke specialty, scholarship status, and team activity during which the injury occurred and lost time were recorded. Risk of injury was assessed relative to gender, stroke specialty, and year of eligibility.

Results: From 2002-2007, 44 male and 50 female athletes competed for the University of Iowa swimming and diving team. The overall injury rates were estimated as 4.00 injuries per 1000 exposures for men and 3.78 injuries per 1000 exposures for women. Thirty-seven percent of injuries resulted in missed time. The shoulder/upper arm was the most frequently injured body part followed by the neck/back. Freshman swimmers suffered the most injuries as well as the highest mean number of injuries per swimmer. A significant pattern of fewer injuries in later years of eligibility was also demonstrated. The relative risk (RR) for injury was higher among nonfreestyle stroke specialties (RR, 1.33 [1.00-1.77]). Injury most often occurred as a result of, or during, practice for all swimmers. However, 38% of injuries were the result of team activities outside of practice or competition, such as strength training. No significant relationship was found between occurrence of injury and gender or scholarship status. There was no significant relationship between body part injured and stroke specialty. An increased number of total injuries and an increased risk of injuries in freshman collegiate swimmers were found.

Conclusion: Particular attention should be given to swimmers making the transition into collegiate level swimming. These data also suggest that injury surveillance and potential prevention strategies should focus on the shoulder for in-pool activities and the axial spine for cross-training activities.

Keywords: swimming; injury; epidemiology; collegiate; stroke

In the last 25 years, it is estimated that a combined total of over 42  000 male and female swimmers have competed at  the  National  Collegiate  Athletic  Association  (NCAA) Division I-A level. 7 Despite the magnitude of these numbers, a lack of information exists regarding the epidemiology  of  musculoskeletal  injury  for  collegiate  swimming. Most previous studies have analyzed injuries incurred as a result of a specific stroke, evaluated a specific body part, or

*Address correspondence to Brian R. Wolf, MD, MS, 200 Hawkins Drive,

Iowa City, IA 52242 (e-mail: brian-wolf@uiowa.edu). No potential conflict of interest declared.

scrutinized  the  biomechanics  of  a  particular  swimming motion. 1,3,9,10 Limited information exists regarding the epidemiology of swimming injury patterns at the collegiate, 4 elite, amateur, and masters levels. 6,8-9 Some of these reports have  relied  on  retrospective  surveys  or  questionnaires rather than training room or physician records. 2,6 Very few studies have detailed the pattern of injury in terms of body location.

Modern collegiate level swimming has evolved into essentially a year-round sport. Swimmers typically continue to swim significant yardage even after the collegiate season has ended. In addition, strength training, dry-land conditioning, and cross-training have become a supplement to in-pool training more than ever before. Consequently, injuries  occur  outside  of  the  pool  as  well.  Little  information

exists  documenting the number of injuries occurring as a result of dry-land training, cross-training, and weight training. Only 1 prior study has examined cross-training-related injuries in female swimmers more than 10 years ago. 4

The  purpose  of  the  current  study  was  to  describe  the pattern of injuries incurred for one NCAA Division I collegiate men's and women's swimming team over the course of  5  years. Additional goals of the study were to analyze time  lost  secondary  to  injury  and  to  analyze  patterns  of injury  relative  to  gender,  team  activity,  position,  stroke specialty, scholarship status, and year of eligibility.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

Following  Institutional  Review  Board  approval,  a  retrospective  review  of  athletic  training  room  injury  reports and physician records was performed for male and female swimmers competing on the University of Iowa collegiate team  from  August  1,  2002  to  July  1,  2007.  All  injuries were  entered  into  the  Sports  Injury  Monitoring  System (SIMS-Med  Sport  Systems,  Dimondale,  Michigan)  by  an athletic trainer. The SIMS is a computer program in which the  athletic  training  staff  enters  injuries  into  a  central database for the university and the conference. This database then provides information for the local medical team to monitor injury status and progress by generating status reports. All medical-related issues for athletes are recorded in  the  SIMS  database  at  the  University  of  Iowa  by  a member of the athletic training staff.

## Definitions

An injury was defined as any musculoskeletal problem suffered as a consequence of team-related activity that resulted in  a  visit  to  an  athletic  trainer  or  physician.  Concussions were  also  included  as  an  injury.  Systemic  illnesses  and injuries that did not occur as a result of swimming-related activity  were  not  included  in  this  study.  A season was defined to reflect the academic year from August 1 to July 31 of the next year. The athlete's eligibility was defined as freshman, sophomore, junior, or senior. Injuries, reported by  body  part,  were  recorded  as  a  result  of  a  particular team-related activity including regular practice, competition, strength training, conditioning, or cross-training. An athlete's position was defined as either sprinter or distance based on team media guides, with sprinters typically participating in events of 200 m or less. A swimmer's stroke specialty was defined as breaststroke, backstroke, butterfly,  freestyle,  or  individual  medley  based  on  the  team media guide. A swimmer was considered on scholarship if he or she received any financial support related to swimming.  An exposure was  defined  as  participation  in  one game,  practice,  strength  training,  conditioning,  or  crosstraining activity.

The SIMS database was reviewed from the time period from August 1, 2002 to July 31, 2007 including all swimmers  for  5  consecutive  seasons.  All  injuries  were  scrutinized  by  3  of  the  authors  for  inclusion  or  exclusion. Systemic illnesses and injuries not related to team-related activities were excluded. Injuries were then categorized for body  part  involved.  For  each  injury,  it  was  also  noted whether the athlete missed participation time as a result of  the  injury.  Swimmers  were  considered  to  have  missed time if the injury resulted in no participation in a practice or meet or if the swimmer was already missing time due to another injury. Furthermore, for every injury, that athlete's position was noted, along with his or her stroke specialty. The team activity during which the injury occurred was categorized. Lastly, scholarship status and year of eligibility were noted for injured swimmers. Exposures were calculated by the SIMS database.

The Mantel-Haenszel c 2 test for trend was used to analyze  for  significance  in  the  relationship  of  injury  occurrence and time missed from injury with gender, position, stroke specialty, scholarship status, and year of eligibility. The relative risk (RR) of injury was also calculated for year of  eligibility,  gender,  and  stroke  specialty. A P &lt; .05  was considered significant.

## RESULTS

From 2002-2007, 94 swimmers competed for the University of  Iowa  swimming  team. Among  the  44  male  swimmers, there were 90 injuries sustained by 32 different male swimmers  (72.7%).  In  the  same  time  period,  50  athletes  competed for the University of Iowa women's swimming team. For  women, 76 injuries occurred overall by 35 individual swimmers (70.0%). The average number of exposures per year was estimated at 4526 for men and 4651 for women. The  injury-exposure  rate  for  men  was  estimated  at  4.00 injuries  per  1000  exposures. The  injury-exposure rate for women was estimated at 3.78 injuries per 1000 exposures.

The risk of suffering injury was not significantly different  between  male  and  female  swimmers  (RR,  1.33  [0.811.37]).  The  proportion  of  injuries  that  resulted  in  missed time also was similar between genders. Overall, 31 of 90 (34.4%) injuries to male swimmers resulted in missed time due to injury. These 31 injuries resulting in missed participation time were suffered by 17 different male athletes. For female swimmers, 30 of 76 (39.5%) injuries resulted in lost time. These 30 injuries resulting in missed time were suffered  by  18  different  female  swimmers.  Four  male  swimmers  underwent  a  total  of  9  surgeries  during  this  time period. There were 4 shoulder surgeries, 4 elbow surgeries, and  1  foot  surgery.  Four  female  swimmers  underwent  a total of 5 surgeries, all of which were shoulder procedures. Overall, 9 of 14 surgeries on swimmers involved the shoulder. One female swimmer retired from swimming after her sophomore  season  during  this  time  period  following repeated injuries and 2 shoulder surgeries.

Table 1 presents the distribution of injuries to different body  regions  and  related  time  missed.  The  body  region most often injured by both male and female swimmers was the  shoulder  and  upper  arm,  which  accounted  for  31% and 36% of the injuries for each group, respectively. Back and  neck  injuries  were  the  second  most  frequent  area injured for both men and women. The shoulder also was the most frequent injury to result in lost time. However,

## TABLE 1

## Distribution of Injuries and Number of Injuries Resulting in Missed Time by Body Part

|                         | Injuries Causing Missed Time/Total Injuries, n   | Injuries Causing Missed Time/Total Injuries, n   | Injuries Causing Missed Time/Total Injuries, n   |
|-------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Body Part               | Male Swimmers (n = 44)                           | Female Swimmers (n = 50)                         | Total Swimmers (n = 94)                          |
| Shoulder/upper arm      | 11/28                                            | 12/27                                            | 23/55                                            |
| Back/neck               | 7/22                                             | 5/16                                             | 12/38                                            |
| Elbow/wrist/hand/finger | 6/18                                             | 1/6                                              | 7/24                                             |
| Knee/leg                | 1/12                                             | 5/13                                             | 6/25                                             |
| Ankle/foot              | 2/4                                              | 2/6                                              | 4/10                                             |
| Concussion              | 3/3                                              | 0                                                | 3/3                                              |
| Hip/thigh               | 0/2                                              | 3/5                                              | 3/7                                              |
| Chest/abdomen           | 1/1                                              | 2/3                                              | 3/4                                              |
| Total                   | 31/90                                            | 30/76                                            | 61/176                                           |

TABLE 2 Distribution of Injuries by Year of Eligibility

|           | No. of Swimmers   | Swimmers Suffering Injury (%)   | Total Injuries   | Mean No. of Injuries   |
|-----------|-------------------|---------------------------------|------------------|------------------------|
| Men       |                   |                                 |                  |                        |
| Freshman  | 24                | 13 (54)                         | 29               | 1.21                   |
| Sophomore | 28                | 16 (57)                         | 27               | 0.96                   |
| Junior    | 27                | 13 (48)                         | 19               | 0.70                   |
| Senior    | 21                | 9 (43)                          | 15               | 0.71                   |
| Women     |                   |                                 |                  |                        |
| Freshman  | 31                | 18 (58)                         | 37               | 1.19                   |
| Sophomore | 28                | 19 (68)                         | 13               | 0.46                   |
| Junior    | 23                | 12 (53)                         | 14               | 0.61                   |
| Senior    | 26                | 9 (34)                          | 12               | 0.46                   |
| Total     |                   |                                 |                  |                        |
| Freshman  | 55                | 31 (56)                         | 66               | 1.20                   |
| Sophomore | 56                | 35 (63)                         | 40               | 0.71                   |
| Junior    | 50                | 25 (50)                         | 33               | 0.66                   |
| Senior    | 47                | 18 (38)                         | 27               | 0.57                   |

there was no statistically significant relationship between body part injured and the likelihood of missing time.

Table 2 shows the distribution of total number of injuries by year of eligibility. Freshman athletes suffered the highest number of total injuries and highest average number of injuries  per  athlete  for  both  women's  and  men's  teams. Freshman women and men suffered a mean of 1.21 and 1.19 injuries per swimmer, respectively. The mean number of injuries per swimmer decreased in later eligibility seasons for both teams. In addition, the risk of suffering an injury  significantly  decreased  with  subsequent  years  of eligibility for the women ( c 2 , P = .03) and for the combined men's and women's teams ( c 2 , P = .04).

Table 3 presents the distribution of injuries by position for sprinters and distance swimmers. Male distance swimmers  had  a  relatively  high  mean  number  of  injuries  at

2.5 injuries per athlete. Female distance swimmers and all sprinters suffered approximately 1.5 injuries per swimmer or  less.  However,  the  risk  of  suffering  an  injury  was  not significantly  different  between  sprinters  and  distance swimmers  (RR,  1.26  [0.93-1.70]).  Also,  the  proportion  of injuries that resulted in missed time occurred with approximately  the  same  frequency  between  sprinters  and  distance swimmers (RR, 0.95 [0.63-1.44]).

Table 4 presents the distribution of injuries and risk of injury by stroke specialty. Freestyle was by far the most common stoke specialty and was also associated with the highest total number of injuries overall. Accordingly, freestyle also had the highest total number of injuries resulting  in  time  missed.  However,  freestyle  was  less  likely  to result in injury than other stroke specialties. In terms of risk for injury by stroke specialty, those swimmers specializing  in  strokes  other  than  freestyle  exhibited  a  33% greater  risk  (RR,  1.33  [1.001-1.77])  of  injury  than  swimmers primarily specializing in freestyle. The distribution of injuries by body part relative to stroke specialty is shown in  Appendix  1  (available  in  the  online  version  of  this article  at  http://ajs.sagepub.com/supplemental/).  There was  no  significant  association  between  stroke  specialty and time missed and no clear association between stroke specialty and body region injured.

The team activity during which injury occurred is presented  in  Appendix  2  (available  in  the  online  version  of this  article  at  http://ajs.sagepub.com/supplemental/).  For both men and women, the activity causing the most injuries  was  swimming  practice  in  the  pool,  representing 55.6% and 60.5% of men's and women's injuries, respectively. Strength training was the activity of injury for 30% of male swimming injuries and 28% of female swimming injuries. Thirty-eight percent of injuries for both the men and women were a result of team activities out of the pool. Practice and strength training activities also represented the majority of the injuries resulting in time lost from participation. Time missed from injury relative to team activity during which the swimmer was injured is also presented in Appendix 2. The 2 team activities that resulted in the majority  of  injuries  were  practice  and  strength  training. The  distribution  of  injuries  for  these  2  activities  is  presented in Table 5. Shoulder injuries were the most often injured body part during practice for both men and women. Back  and  neck  injuries,  followed  by  shoulder,  were  the most common injuries with strength training for both men and women swimmers.

There  did  not  appear  to  be  any  relationship  between scholarship status and the pattern of injury or time missed from  injury.  There  were  33  male  athletes  on  scholarship and 11 nonscholarship athletes (25%). Of the 90 total injuries  among  male  swimmers,  57  (63%)  injuries  were  suffered  by  scholarship  athletes,  whereas  33  (36%)  were incurred by nonscholarship athletes. Thirty-six percent of injuries  resulted  in  missed  time  for  scholarship  male swimmers versus 25% for nonscholarship male swimmers. There were 37 female scholarship swimmers and 13 nonscholarship athletes (26%). Of the 88 total female swimming injuries,  female  scholarship  athletes  suffered  68  (77.3%) injuries while nonscholarship athletes suffered 20 (22.7%)

TABLE 3

## Distribution of Injuries and Injuries Resulting in Missed Time by Position

|                   |   No. of Swimmers at Position |   Total Injuries | Injuries Resulting in Missed Time   |   Injuries per Swimmer by Position |
|-------------------|-------------------------------|------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Men's distance    |                            26 |               66 | 23 (35%)                            |                               2.54 |
| Men's sprinters   |                            18 |               24 | 8 (33%)                             |                               1.33 |
| Women's distance  |                            27 |               42 | 16 (38%)                            |                               1.55 |
| Women's sprinters |                            23 |               34 | 14 (41%)                            |                               1.47 |

TABLE 4 Risk of Suffering Injury at Different Stroke Specialties

|                | Swimmers Who Suffered Injury/Swimmers at Stroke Specialty, n (%)   | Swimmers Who Suffered Injury/Swimmers at Stroke Specialty, n (%)   | Swimmers Who Suffered Injury/Swimmers at Stroke Specialty, n (%)   | Swimmers Who Suffered Injury/Swimmers at Stroke Specialty, n (%)   | Swimmers Who Suffered Injury/Swimmers at Stroke Specialty, n (%)   | Swimmers Who Suffered Injury/Swimmers at Stroke Specialty, n (%)   |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Team           | Freestyle                                                          | Backstroke                                                         | Breaststroke                                                       | Butterfly                                                          | Individual Medley                                                  | Total                                                              |
| Men            | 13/18 (72)                                                         | 5/7 (71)                                                           | 7/8 (88)                                                           | 5/8 (63)                                                           | 2/3 (67)                                                           | 32/44 (73)                                                         |
| Women          | 16/32 (50)                                                         | 6/7 (86)                                                           | 2/2 (100)                                                          | 3/5 (60)                                                           | 4/4 (100)                                                          | 31/50 (62)                                                         |
| Total swimmers | 29/50 (58)                                                         | 11/14 (76)                                                         | 9/10 (90)                                                          | 8/13 (62)                                                          | 6/7 (86)                                                           | 63/94 (67)                                                         |

TABLE 5 Distribution of Strength Training and Practice Injuries by Body Part

|                              | Concussion   | Elbow/ Wrist/Hand   | Shoulder/ Upper Arm   | Back/ Neck   | Knee/ Leg   | Hip/ Thigh   | Ankle/ Foot   | Chest/ Abdomen   | Total   |
|------------------------------|--------------|---------------------|-----------------------|--------------|-------------|--------------|---------------|------------------|---------|
| Men                          |              |                     |                       |              |             |              |               |                  |         |
| Strength training            | 0            | 4                   | 6                     | 14           | 2           | 0            | 1             | 0                | 27      |
| Practice                     | 3            | 13                  | 18                    | 7            | 6           | 2            | 0             | 1                | 50      |
| Women                        |              |                     |                       |              |             |              |               |                  |         |
| Strength training            | 0            | 1                   | 4                     | 8            | 4           | 1            | 1             | 2                | 21      |
| Practice                     | 0            | 5                   | 23                    | 8            | 5           | 2            | 2             | 1                | 46      |
| Total team Strength training | 0            | 5                   | 10                    | 22           | 6           | 1            | 2             | 2                | 48      |
| Practice                     | 3            | 18                  | 41                    | 15           | 11          | 4            | 2             | 2                | 96      |

injuries. Thirty-seven  percent  of  injuries  resulted  in  time lost for scholarship swimmers versus 50% for nonscholarship  female  swimmers. There was no statistically significant relationship between scholarship status and injury.

between scholarship and nonscholarship athletes for both genders as well.

## DISCUSSION

The results of this study provide several interesting findings. There were no significant differences in the number of  injuries  per  team-related  exposures  when  comparing injuries  by  gender.  In  addition,  similar  injury  patterns were  seen  between  genders  in  terms  of  stroke  specialty, position,  and  activities  during  which  an  injury  occurred. Injuries  and  time  missed  related  to  injury  were  similar

The relationship of injury and year of college eligibility was a remarkable finding in this group of swimmers. The highest  total  number  of  injuries  and  the  highest  mean number of injuries per swimmer occurred during the freshman year of eligibility. Both genders demonstrated a general  decrease  in  the  number  of  injuries  and  injury  rates after the freshman season. This decrease was more gradual in the men's team and more dramatic for the women's team. In addition, we also found a significant decrease in the risk of suffering an injury with later years of eligibility. The high prevalence of injuries during the early college years is likely explained by the transition from high school training regimens to that of the collegiate level. The yardage required of

college swimmers and additional cross-training activities are often substantially greater than what an athlete was accustomed to in high school and club swimming. This can lead to overuse-type injuries early in a swimmer's college career. As the swimmers become accustomed to the yardage  and  workout  routine,  fewer  injuries  are  incurred.  A second  possible  explanation  for  fewer  injuries  after  the freshman  season  is  that  frequently  injured  freshman swimmers may subsequently decide to no longer swim. We did not find this to be the case in our group of swimmers. One athlete discontinued swimming secondary to medical issues, but this occurred following the sophomore season.

Not surprisingly, practice was the most common activity that  led  to  injury,  accounting  for  nearly  60%  of  injuries. Approximately 38% of injuries in this study resulted from team activities out of the pool, including strength training and dry-land workouts. This is similar to what was reported by McFarland and Wasik, 4 who found that 44% of all injuries were caused by cross-training in a cohort of collegiate female swimmers. Cross-training is thought to be additive to an athlete's overall fitness and a way to enhance a swimmer's ability to compete. It is impossible to assess from our data how many injuries may have been prevented or how much  swimming  performance  was  enhanced  by  crosstraining. Yet,  swimmers  are  often  not  accustomed  to  the particulars  of  nonswimming  workouts,  and  this  may explain  our  high  incidence  of  out-of-pool  injuries.  Our results suggest that these programs need to be scrutinized closely given that nearly 40% of injuries continue to occur out of the pool. The cost/benefit ratio for cross-training and related  injuries  may  be  reason  to  alter  some  out-of-pool training activities.

Overall, although our results show that collegiate swimming has a low injury per exposure rate, there can still be important time loss resulting from such occurrences. We found an injury rate of 4.0 and 3.78 per 1000 exposures for men and women, respectively. McFarland and Wasik 4 previously had found an injury rate of 2.12 per 1000 exposures for a collegiate female cohort. This increase in the number of injuries suffered by collegiate swimmers likely reflects the trend that is occurring with all sports in which intensive training persists essentially all year, even in the outof-season months.

Our results  show  that  the  shoulder  was  the  most  frequently injured body part. This is consistent with a previous  study  in  which  shoulder  injury  comprised  55%  of swimming-related  injuries  but  only  9%  of  cross-training injuries in collegiate female swimmers. 4 No such literature exists for men. There has been some implication that the shoulder is the body part that has the greatest incidence of injury  in  swimmers  in  general,  although  studies  range from 3% to a high of 67%, and these were not specific for the  collegiate  level. 2,5 In  the  current  study,  the  shoulder accounted for 36% of men's injuries and 50% of women's injuries  suffered  during  practice.  Shoulder  injuries  are likely  reflective  of  the  repetitive  strain  on  the  shoulders produced by swimming. We found that injury to the shoulder is the most frequent cause of injury and missed time. The shoulder also was the body part on which swimmers most commonly had surgery. Given these results, it seems reasonable to consider the development of preventive training programs focused on shoulder injuries. Back and neck injuries were also relatively frequent in our group. However, these injuries were most commonly associated with crosstraining activities.

Interestingly,  stroke  specialties  other  than  freestyle were  associated  with  a  higher  risk  for  injury.  However, our cohort had substantially fewer swimmers with nonfreestyle specialties listed in the media guides. Our data did not demonstrate any clear relationship between specific  stroke  specialties  and  injuries  to  particular  body parts. Our stroke specialty designations and distance versus  sprinter  designations  were  based  on  listings  in  the team media guides for each season. It should be noted that distance  events  are  almost  exclusively  freestyle  events. We  fully  recognize  that  many  swimmers  participate  in races in several strokes and different distances. It is likely that many of the swimmers categorized for a particular stroke in our study actually participated in many stroke specialty events. Additionally, specialists in nonfreestyle events usually do significant freestyle yardage on a daily basis  in  practice.  Therefore  our  information  on  injuries related  to  particular  stroke  specialty  should  be  viewed accordingly.

Our study is limited in several ways. This retrospective analysis  deals  only  with  one  collegiate  team  over  the course  of  5  seasons  and  therefore  may  suffer  from  sampling error related to local factors for this particular team. This  team  had  relatively  consistent  training  regimens comparable  with  other  collegiate  programs  across  the country during this time, although 2 different head coaches and  coaching  staffs  presided  over  the  team  for  2  and 3 years, respectively. Also, our data may be difficult to generalize  to  a  noncollegiate  swimming  population.  In  addition, although our data allowed for describing injuries in terms  of  whether  time  was  lost  due  to  injury,  we  were unable to consistently determine exactly how much time was lost with a number of cases. Therefore we cannot present an average time lost per injury. Lastly, our data rely on the  data  entry  over  the  course  of  5  years  during  which several athletic trainers documented injuries, which led to variability in the detail of data that was reviewed.

In  summary,  we  found  interesting  injury  information regarding a previously poorly understood group: collegiate swimmers.  Injury  patterns  for  men  and  women  largely were similar in scope. We found a larger number of injuries in  early  eligibility  years  for  both  male  and  especially female swimmers. The shoulder was the most commonly involved body part. We feel there are 2 areas where swimming  injury  prevention  could  be  attempted.  First,  the incorporation of freshman swimmers into collegiate training programs should be carefully monitored. Those freshman  swimmers  who  are  unaccustomed  to  significant cross-training activities or collegiate level yardage appear to  be  prone  to  injury.  Training  regimen  adjustment  and close assessment of freshmen athletes for signs of overuse injury  may  decrease  injury  occurrence  and  time  missed. Secondly, our data suggest that injury prevention should focus  on  the  shoulder  for  in-pool  activities  and  the  axial spine for cross-training and strength activities.

2042 Wolf et al

## REFERENCES

1. Grote K, Lincoln TL, Gamble JG. Hip adductor injury in competitive swimmers. Am J Sports Med. 2004;32(1):104-108.
2. Kennedy JC, Hawkins R, Krissoff WB. Orthopaedic manifestations of swimming. Am J Sports Med. 1978;6(6):309-322.
3. Keskinen  K,  Eriksson  E,  Komi  P .  Breaststroke  swimmer's  knee:  a biomechanical and arthroscopic study. Am J Sports Med. 1980;8(4): 228-231.
4. McFarland EG, Wasik M. Injuries in female collegiate swimmers due to swimming and cross training. Clin J Sport Med. 1996;6(3):178-182.
6. McMaster WC, Troup J. A survey of interfering shoulder pain in United States competitive swimmers. Am J Sports Med. 1993;21(1):67-70.
7. NCAA Sports Sponsorship and Participation Rates Report 1981/822005/06. Indianapolis,  IN:  National  Collegiate  Athletic  Association; 2007.
8. Richardson  AB,  Jobe  FW,  Collins  HR.  The  shoulder  in  competitive swimming. Am J Sports Med. 1980;8(3):159-163.
9. Rovere  GD,  Nichols  AW.  Frequency,  associated  factors,  and  treatment of breaststroker's knee in competitive swimmers. Am J Sports Med. 1985;13(2):99-104.
5. McMaster  WC.  Shoulder  injuries  in  competitive  swimmers.  Clin Sports Med. 1999;18(2):349-359, vii.
10. Vizsolyi  P ,  Taunton  J,  Robertson  G,  et  al.  Breaststroker's  knee:  an analysis of epidemiological and biomechanical factors. Am J Sports Med. 1987;15(1):63-71.

For reprints and permission queries, please visit SAGE's Web site at http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav