<!-- image -->

## CLINICAL COMMENTARY

## RETURN TO SWIMMING PROTOCOL FOR COMPETITIVE SWIMMERS: A POST-OPERATIVE CASE STUDY AND FUNDAMENTALS

Tracy Spigelman, PhD, ATC 1 Aaron Sciascia, MS, ATC, NASM-PES 2 Tim Uhl, PhD, ATC, PT 3

## ABSTRACT

A large percentage of swimmers report shoulder pain during their swimming career. Shoulder pain in swimmers has been attributed to duration of swim practice, total yardage, and break down in stroke technique. Rehabilitation programs are generally land-based and cannot adequately address the intricacies of the swimming strokes. Return to swimming protocols (RTSP) that address progression of yardage are scarce, yet needed. The purpose of this clinical commentary is to familiarize the clinician with the culture and vernacular of swimming, and to provide a suggested yardage based RTSP for high school and collegiate level swimmers.

Keywords: Freestyle stroke, technique, yardage

Level of Evidence: 5

## CORRESPONDING AUTHOR

Tracy Spigelman, Ph.D., ATC Clinical Coordinator/Assistant Professor Athletic Training Education Program Eastern Kentucky University Richmond, KY 40475 USA

E-mail: Tracy.spigelman@eku.edu

- 1  Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, KY, USA
- 2  The Shoulder Center of Kentucky, Lexington Clinic, Lexington, KY, USA
- 3  University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA

## INTRODUCTION

Forty  to  ninety-one  percent  of  age  group  through masters'  level  swimmers  report  shoulder  pain  at some  point  during  their  careers. 1-6   Furthermore, increased  shoulder  pain  has  been  related  to  duration of swim practice, total yardage, and break down in stroke technique. 1,3,7-9  During rehabilitation, all of these components may need to be addressed. One key component of rehabilitation is return to sport specific activities and progressions. Interval return to  sport  programs  exist  for  activities  such  as  baseball, 10,11 running, tennis, golf and softball. 12-14  Unfortunately,  interval  return  to  swimming  protocols (RTSP)  are  scarce. 15   The  culture  of  swimming  is that  the  athletes  spend  large  quantities  of  time  in the pool practicing; therefore it is important to get swimmers back in the pool practicing as soon as possible. 16  Adding to the complexity of utilizing an RTSP , swimming has its own vocabulary and training rituals that are engrained in the culture. One beneficial component of the swimming culture is that training is yardage based allowing for the development of an interval training protocol utilizing yardage. Another key  component  in  the  swimming  culture  focused on  by  coaches  and  swimmers  is  the  importance of  proper  stroke  mechanics  to  increase  efficiency and  decrease  injury  risk.  Poor  mechanics  during swimming has been linked with injuries and consequently needs to be understood and addressed in the rehabilitation process. 5,17-19

This  current  concept  paper  has  three  objectives. First,  to  familiarize  the  clinician  with  the  culture and  vocabulary  of  swimming  so  that  communication between the clinician and athlete and coaches is enhanced. Second, to describe a protocol based on yardage that incorporates specific drills to improve stroke mechanics and interval work in order to gradually restore speed. The final objective is to share a  case  example  of  how  the  RTSP  was  used  in  the return to sport of a collegiate swimmer.

## Swimming Rehabilitation Review

Swimming specific rehabilitation traditionally focuses on scapular stabilization, 20 core body strength, neuromuscular re-education of the shoulder musculature, 21,22  correction of forward head and rounded  shoulder  posture, 23   and  generally  takes place  in  a  clinic  on  dry  land.  There  are  excellent articles and case reports that address clinical rehabilitation techniques but these are not the focus of this clinical commentary. 20,23-26  Attempts to replicate freestyle stroke technique using dry-land swimming benches have been found to recruit muscle in different  patterns  and  may  not  replicate  the  swimming stroke  ideally. 16,27   So,  when  working  to  correct  a swimmer's stroke technique, it is best done in the water. Understanding the stroke mechanics and the drills  that  are  commonly  used  by  coaches  in  the swimming community to enhance stroke technique is important.

## Freestyle Biomechanics

Proper technique of the freestyle stroke is important to injury prevention. 4,5,9,17,18,28,29  While the swim coach should be the primary person to evaluate a swimmer's stroke technique, clinicians should have working  knowledge  of  how  freestyle  stroke  technique should look (Figure 1). There are several extensive articles that describe the mechanics of freestyle and the  other  competitive  swimming  strokes  that  are beyond the scope of this clinical commentary. For more in-depth knowledge the reader is referred to these articles. 4,8,17,18,28-30

There are various descriptions of the freestyle stroke. The biomechanical literature breaks freestyle stroke into five phases, 31  while the more clinically focused literature  breaks  the  freestyle  stroke  into  three  or four phases. 4,29,32  Since the objective of this paper is to  provide  a  general  RTSP  for  clinicians,  the  freestyle stroke has been divided into four phases: hand entry,  early  pull-through,  late  pull-through,  and

Figure 1. The freestyle swimming stroke.

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. Hand entry (right UE)

<!-- image -->

Figure 3. Early pull-through phase (right UE)

<!-- image -->

recovery. 4,18,28,30  It is important to note that a breakdown in one part of the stroke cycle can result in compensatory strategies throughout the rest of the cycle, leading to potential injury. 4,9,18,29,30  Hand entry occurs  as  the  finger  tips  break  the  surface  of  the water (Figure 2). 4,18  Early pull-through is defined as the point from which the hand enters the water till it is perpendicular with the body (Figure 3). 4,30  During the  late  pull-through  phase,  the  arm  moves  under the body accelerating until the arm exits the water (Figure 4). 4  Recovery phase begins as the arm exits the water and ends as the finger tips break the surface of the water (Figure 5). 4,8,18,28,29

Each phase has the potential to have biomechanical flaws that could result in injury. 4,5,29  A common flaw observed during hand entry is when the swimmer enters the water with the hand either medial or lat-

Figure 4. Late pull-through phase (right UE)

<!-- image -->

Figure 5. Recovery phase of the freestyle stroke. Note high elbow position.

<!-- image -->

eral  to  the  midline.  A  right  hand  should  enter  the water at approximately one o'clock and a left hand at 11 o'clock with the swimmer's head representing 12 o'clock. Deviations, either medial or lateral represent an error because they increase the stress on the rotator cuff. 4,8,17,18,28,29   During early pull-through, a  common  flaw  observed  in  swimming  mechanics is the 'dropped elbow' . 4,18,28,29  As the hand enters the water, the wrist is slightly flexed and the elbow should remain higher than the hand while the arm pulls  under  the  body.  This  position  engages  the latissumus dorsi muscles and sets the swimmer up to pull the body over the arm preventing impingement. 4,18,29   It  also  creates  a  smooth,  symmetrical body roll which decreases stress on the rotator cuff muscles and allows the scapula to stay appropriately anchored on the thorax. 4,17,18  A straight arm recovery is yet another flaw that occurs during freestyle swim-

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Table 1. Swimming Tools. Tools commonly used by competitive swimmers. Tools should be used with caution depending on swimmer's injury.

| Tool      | Name                                                                                                               | Use/Indications                                                                                                                                            | Contraindications                                     |
|-----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| Kickboard | Used to focus on kicking only; Most commonly used with arms extended in front of the body; creates lumbar lordosis | Shoulder injuries; spondylolysis                                                                                                                           |                                                       |
| Pull buoy | Used to focus on arm stroke only; Placed between upper legs to prevent kicking while providing                     | buoyancy to the lower body                                                                                                                                 | Shoulder tendinitis/tendinosis; elbow or forearm pain |
| Fins      | Used to increase                                                                                                   | leg length and surface area of the feet; increase propulsion of stroke                                                                                     | Acute ankle injuries; knee pain                       |
|           | Zoomers                                                                                                            | Used to increase leg strength; increase surface area of the feet, but are shorter than fins and allow for rapid leg motions to increase forward propulsion | Acute ankle injuries; knee pain                       |
| Paddles   |                                                                                                                    | Worn on hands; come in variety of sizes; increase surface area of the hand; slow down pull when worn, but build strength while pulling                     | Shoulder injury or pain; improper stroke technique    |

ming. 4,29  This means that during the recovery phase, the elbow is fully extended while the arm is out of the water. During the recovery phase, a bent elbow is favorable because it reduces the amount of stress on the rotator cuff. 29  For a more in depth explanation of errors made during freestyle swimming, readers are encouraged to review the article by Virag et al. 29

Freestyle swimming uses a flutter kick. Flutter kicking  requires  alternating  motions  of  the  legs.  When performed correctly, the flutter kick agitates the water giving it the appearance of boiling water. The power of the kick comes from the hip flexors and extensors. The  knee  is  slightly  flexed  and  extended  while  the ankles are plantar flexed and inverted. The even four or six beat kick (the equivalent of two or three kicks per  individual  arm  revolution)  are  most  commonly used by distance and sprinters, respectively. , T aking a breath every three arm strokes, also referred to as an alternate breathing pattern, is also helpful for developing a freestyle stroke with correct biomechanics. 18,28

created (Appendix 1) to better communicate with the swimmer and speak their language when discussing swimming.  There  are  several  pieces  of  equipment, described in T able 1, that are commonly used in swim training and may be beneficial in returning a swimmer to full activity. However, there are contraindications to the use of equipment that are important for the rehabilitation professional to understand. Numerous drills are used to help swimmers focus on maintaining  proper  stroke  technique  throughout  swim practice.  The most common drills and the phase of the stroke cycle they focus on are described in T able 2.

## Return to Swimming Protocol

To  familiarize  the  clinician  with  the  swimming  culture, a vocabulary of common terminology has been

The criterion to begin the RTSP include: 1) the swimmer should be nearly pain free in the shoulder complex and 2) full active extension and external rotation of the glenohumeral joint should exist. The strength of  the  rotator  cuff  and  scapular  stabilizing  muscles should be a 5/5 when tested using traditional manual muscle testing. 25,33  Phase One of the RTSP focuses on stroke technique drills to prevent the swimmer from reverting to bad habits that could reinjure the shoulder. The yardage increases in small increments to  prevent  overuse.  Phase  T wo  focuses  on  interval

work designed to help build the swimmer's muscular and cardiovascular fitness levels. Yardage increases in  larger  increments  in  order  to  help  build  endurance  as  the  swimmer  demonstrates  he  or  she  can tolerate  longer  practices.  The  RTSP  is  designed  to gradually return the swimmer to practice, so focus on the swimmer's specialty stroke or distance is not addressed at this point. It is the authors' opinion that the  swimmer  should  swim  with  proper  freestyle technique and without pain before performing event specific and distance specific practices.

Table 3 illustrates the key points of progression during  the  RTSP .  The  components  of  a  swim  practice

Table 4. Swimming Soreness Rules (adapted with permission from Axe, M). Guidelines to help the swimmer recognize pain and the clinician adjust the swimming portion of shoulder rehabilitation.

include  variations  in  warm-up,  drills,  kick,  pull, intensity, and rest. Criteria to progress from phase to phase are defined in Table 3. It is necessary for the swimmer and coach to understand that the athlete should progress slowly. Increases in pain, soreness, or discomfort need to be recognized by the swimmer as possible warning signs to decrease training and have the coach re-evaluate stroke mechanics (Table 4). The proposed RTSP protocol has been previously used in a collegiate swimmer to assist with return to swimming.

his yardage by 30% between days 1 and 2, and 20% between  days  2  and  3.  This  might  have  been  too large a jump in yardage as pain was reported in the beginning of the second week that resulted in a few days off. During weeks two and three, the swimmer's daily yardage was increased by less than 5% increments, focus was placed on drill work and kicking, and interval work was introduced. No complaints or increase in symptoms were reported.

## Case Example

A  20-year-old,  male,  National  Collegiate  Athletic Association (NCAA) Division III, distance swimmer reported to the Athletic Training Clinic following a closed anterior, Bankart repair on his right shoulder. He had completed rehabilitation at home during the summer months and was released by his physician for return to swimming upon return to college. He reported to school and was examined, demonstrating full range of motion, normal strength, and a negative anterior apprehension test.

The  swimmer  worked  with  the  both  the  Certified Athletic  Trainer  and  his  coach  using  the  outlined RTSP. He reported to the pool Monday, Wednesday and  Friday  and  to  the  Athletic  Training  Clinic  for formal rehabilitation T uesday and Thursday. Table 5 details the swimmer's weekly progression using the RTSP. Phase One/Week One emphasized improving stroke technique with increased recovery. A 'stroke progression,' series of drills to focus on stroke technique, was designed by the coach and incorporated into each warm up (Table 6). The swimmer increased

As the swimmer entered Phase Two, his practices consisted  mostly  of  interval  work.  Yardage  was slightly  decreased  (from  3750  yds  to  2800  yds)  to accommodate  for  the  increase  in  intensity  during week four. Entering week five, interval work became the primary focus, with drill work at the end of practice to remind the swimmer to focus on technique even when he was fatigued, as suggested within the RTSP. The swimmer was able to tolerate the progression well with his surgical shoulder, but complained of pain in his left shoulder in week six. Yardage was decreased  and  drill  work  became  the  main  focus of the practices because this was the only way the swimmer could maintain 'perfect stroke technique.' Reports from the coach noted the swimmer could tolerate practice as long as he used 'perfect stroke technique.' Practices were adapted to be mostly drill work, but ultimately, the swimmer returned to the doctor for the pain and was diagnosed with a labral tear in the non-involved left shoulder. At that time, his season ended. Feedback from the Certified Athletic  T rainer  and  coach  using  the  RTSP  were  positive. The coach reported the RTSP was easy to follow and the swimmer progressed well, aside from complications with the opposite shoulder.

## Table 5. Sample Case. Example of a Division III Swimmer applying the RTSP . Major components of a swimming workout are defi  ned next to each work out. Intensity is defi  ned as a percentage of maximum effort. Rest intervals were adapted based on intensity.

## SUMMARY

The RTSP was designed by the lead author who is a Certified Athletic Trainer, former NCAA Division I swimmer, and earned a PhD with an emphasis in biomechanics. The RTSP was inspired by conversa- tions and interactions with colleagues working with injured swimmers. To date, it has been used by one NCAA  Division  III  collegiate  swimmer  who  was recovering  from  a  closed,  anterior  Bankart  repair, and has been shared among colleagues to use as pro-

posed guidelines for a return to sport progression. While  the  evidence  is  limited  regarding  yardage based protocols for swimmers, the authors believe this  program  provides  clinicians  and  coaches  with a  specific  starting  point  to  ease  a  swimmer  back into practice. It does not address a swimmer's specialty (i.e. sprint or distance) because the first goal is  to  reestablish correct freestyle stroke technique, then increase endurance and training volume. The authors suggest that practices be tailored to a swimmer's specialty event or stroke once the swimmer has rejoined the team, and can practice pain free. Feedback from colleagues who have used the RTSP has been positive, but further research is needed in this area to support and refine the RTSP .

## REFERENCES

1.  Sein ML, Walton J, Linklater J, et al. Shoulder pain in elite swimmers: primarily due to swim-volumeinduced supraspinatus tendinopathy. Br. J. Sports Med. 2010;44(2):105-113.
2.  Bak K, Fauno P . Clinical fi  ndings in competitive swimmers with shoulder pain. Am. J. Sports Med. 1997;25(2):254-260.
3.  Brushoj C, Bak K, Johannsen HV, Fauno P . Swimmers' painful shoulder arthroscopic fi  ndings and return rate to sports. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports. 2007;17(4):373-377.
4.  Wanivenhaus F, Fox AJ, Chaudhury S, Rodeo SA. Epidemiology of injuries and prevention strategies
5. in competitive swimmers. Sports health. 2012;4(3):246-251.
5.  Wolf BR, Ebinger AE, Lawler MP , Britton CL. Injury Patterns in Division I Collegiate Swimming. Am. J. Sports Med. 2009;37(10):2037-2042.
6.  T ate A, T urner GN, Knab SE, Jorgensen C, Strittmatter A, Michener LA. Risk Factors Associated With Shoulder Pain and Disability Across the Lifespan of Competitive Swimmers. J Athl Train. 2012;47(2):149-158.
7.  Beach ML, Whitney SL, Dickoff-Hoffman SA. Relationship of shoulder fl  exibility, strength, and endurance to shoulder pain in competitive swimmers. J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 1992;16(6):262-268.
8.  Abrams GD, Safran MR. Diagnosis and management of superior labrum anterior posterior lesions in overhead athletes. Br. J. Sports Med. 2010;44(5): 311-318.
9.  Pink MM, Tibone JE. The painful shoulder in the swimming athlete. Orthop. Clin. North Am. 2000;31(2):247-+.
10.  Axe M, Hurd W, Snyder-Mackler L. Data-Based Interval Throwing Programs for Baseball Players. Sports Health: A Multidisciplinary Approach. 2009: 145-153.
11.  Escamilla RF, Ionno M, deMahy MS, et al. Comparison of three baseball-specifi  c 6-week training programs on throwing velocity in high school baseball players. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2012;26(7):1767-1781.

12.  Fredericson M, Cookingham CL, Chaudhari AM, Dowdell BC, Oestreicher N, Sahrmann SA. Hip abductor weakness in distance runners with iliotibial band syndrome. Clin. J. Sport Med. 2000;10(3): 169-175.
13.  Kaeding CC, Yu JR, Wright R, Amendola A, Spindler KP. Management and return to play of stress fractures. Clin. J. Sport Med. 2005;15(6):442-447.
14.  Reinold MM, Wilk KE, Reed J, Crenshaw K, Andrews JR. Interval sport programs: Guidelines for baseball, tennis, and golf. J. Orthop. Sports Phys. Ther. 2002;32(6):293-298.
15.  Hamman S. Considerations and return to swim protocol for the pediatric swimmer after nonoperative injury. Int. J. Sports Phys. Ther. 2014;9(3):388-395.
16.  Olbrecht J, Clarys JP . EMG of specifi  c strength training exercises for the front crawl. In: Hollander AP, ed. Biomechanics and medicine in swimming: proceedings of the Fourth International Symposium of Biomechancis in Swimming and Fifth International Congress on Swimming Medicine . United States: Human Kinetics; 1983:136-141.
17.  Johnson JN, Gauvin J, Fredericson M. Swimming biomechanics and injury prevention: new stroke techniques and medical considerations. Physician Sportsmed. 2003;31(1):41-46.
18.  Lintner D, Noonan TJ, Kibler WB. Injury Patterns and Biomechanics of the Athlete's Shoulder. Clin. Sports Med. 2008;27(4):527-551.
19.  Pink M, Perry J, Browne A, Scovazzo ML, Kerrigan J. The normal shoulder during freestyle swimming an electromyographic and cinematographic analysis of 12 muscles. Am. J. Sports Med. 1991;19(6):569-576.
20.  Ben Kibler W, Sciascia A. Rehabilitation of the Athlete's Shoulder. Clin. Sports Med. 2008;27(4): 821-+.
21.  Swanik KA, Lephart SM, Swanik B, Lephart SP , Stone DA, Fu FH. The effects of shoulder plyometric training on proprioception and selected muscle performance characteristics. J. Shoulder Elbow Surg. 2002;11(6):579-586.
22.  Swanik KA, Swanik CB, Lephart SM, Huxel K. The effect of functional training on the incidence of shoulder pain and strength in intercollegiate swimmers. J. Sport Rehabil. 2002;11(2):140-154.
23.  Kluemper M, Uhl T, Hazelrigg H. Effect of stretching and strengthening shoulder muscles on forward shoulder posture in competitive swimmers. J. Sport Rehabil. 2006;15(1):58-70.
24.  Carson PA. The rehabilitation of a competitive swimmer with an asymmetrical breaststroke movement pattern. Man. Ther. 1999;4(2):100-106.
25.  Kurtz JT. A Chiropractic Case Report in the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Swimmer's Shoulder. J Chiropr. 2004;41(10):32-38.
26.  Lynch SS, Thigpen CA, Mihalik JP , Prentice WE, Padua D. The effects of an exercise intervention on forward head and rounded shoulder postures in elite swimmers. Br. J. Sports Med. 2010;44(5):376-381.
27.  Clarys JP . Hydrodynamics and electromyography: ergonomics aspects in aquatics. Appl. Ergon. 1985;16(1):11-24.
28.  Heinlein SA, Cosgarea AJ. Biomechanical Considerations in the Competitive Swimmer's Shoulder. Sports Health: A Multidisciplinary Approach. 2010;2(6):519-525.
29.  Virag B, Hibberd EE, Oyama S, Padua DA, Myers JB. Prevalence of freestyle biomechanical errors in elite competitive swimmers. Sports health. 2014;6(3):218224.
30.  Richardson AB, Jobe FW, Collins HR. The shoulder in competitive swimming. Am. J. Sports Med. 1980;8(3):159-163.
31.  Seifert L, Chollet D, Rouard A. Swimming constraints and arm coordination. Human Movement Science. 2007;26(1):68-86.
32.  Richardson AB, Jobe FW, Collins HR. The shoulder in competitve swimming. Am. J. Sports Med. 1980;8(3):159-163.
33.  Kendall FP , Kendall FP . Muscles : testing and function with posture and pain. 5th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins; 2005.

| Appendix 1. Commonly used swimming vocabulary with examples of how it is used   | Appendix 1. Commonly used swimming vocabulary with examples of how it is used                                                                                                                                           | Appendix 1. Commonly used swimming vocabulary with examples of how it is used                                                                                                                                                                       |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Word                                                                            | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Example/Application                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Base                                                                            | The pace a swimmer or group of swimmer can swim 100 yards repeatedly and still finish with 5- 10 seconds rest. Allows practices to be more individualized.                                                              | 5x100 yards base (1:30) 5x100 yards base +5 (1:35) allows for more rest (easier) 5x100 yards base -5 (1:25) allows for less rest (harder)                                                                                                           |
| Drills                                                                          | Used to help swimmers focus on specific parts of the stroke cycle. They exaggerate one particular phase of the stroke.                                                                                                  | Finger-tip drag drill requires the swimmer to drag the finger tips on the top of the water during the recovery phase. This exaggerates the bent elbow to help the swimmer focus on proper recovery technique.                                       |
| Distance Swimmer                                                                | A swimmer who competes in events that are over 500 yards/meters.                                                                                                                                                        | 500 yards/meters, 1000 yards/meters, 1650 yards/meters.                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Lap                                                                             | 2 lengths = 50 yards/meters or 1 lap                                                                                                                                                                                    | If a swimmer is asked to swim a '50' that is 2x25 yards/meters of the pool                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Length                                                                          | Standard, short course, competition pools are either 25 yards or 25 meters long. 1 length = 25 yards or meters Length is more commonly used than Lap.                                                                   | If a swimmer is asked to swim a '100' it means 4x25 yards/meters or 4 length of the pool continuously.                                                                                                                                              |
| Long course                                                                     | Olympic length 50 meter pool                                                                                                                                                                                            | If a swimmer is asked to swim 100 meters long course, it is 2 lengths of the pool.                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Intensity                                                                       | Used to describe the effort a swimmer is putting into each set throughout swim practice. It can be defined specifically using %of effort, but is commonly stated as 'hard,' 'moderate,' or 'easy' on a written workout. | 5x100 yards 85% max effort Or 5x100 yards hard                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Interval                                                                        | Performing the distances in an allotted amount of time; the swimmer will only get rest if they can complete the distance before the defined interval time expires.                                                      | 5x100 yards freestyle 1:45 This means each 200 yard freestyle trial should be completed faster than 1 minute and 45 seconds for the swimmer to get rest. The faster the swimmer completes each 100 yard freestyle trial, the more rest he/she gets. |

| Appendix 1. (Continued) Commonly used swimming vocabulary with examples of how it is used   | Appendix 1. (Continued) Commonly used swimming vocabulary with examples of how it is used                                                                                                                                       | Appendix 1. (Continued) Commonly used swimming vocabulary with examples of how it is used                                     |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Kick                                                                                        | Focus on the kick component of the stroke using a kick board prone, in a streamlined position supine or on the side with one arm extended.                                                                                      | 5x100 kick w board Kick using a kickboard                                                                                     |
| Mid-distance swimmer                                                                        | A swimmer who competes in events between 200 yards and 500 yards long.                                                                                                                                                          | 200 yard freestyle, 500 yard freestyle                                                                                        |
| Negative Split                                                                              | When the second half of a swimming event is faster than the first half of the swimming event                                                                                                                                    | 200 yard freestyle 2:30 1 st 100 yards 1:20 2 nd 100 yards 1:10                                                               |
| Pull                                                                                        | Focus on the arm component of the stroke using a pull buoy. Often hand paddles are used with the pull buoy during a pull set. This is not advised for an injured shoulder because the added resistance can exacerbate symptoms. | 5x100 pull w paddles Swim using a pull buoy and hand paddles                                                                  |
| Rest                                                                                        | Time between each swim; Rest time means swimmers will always get a break between each swim.                                                                                                                                     | 5x100 yards Rest 20 This means rest 20 sec after each 100 yard swim.                                                          |
| Scull                                                                                       | Moving hands and forearm out and in against the water                                                                                                                                                                           | Commonly used as a drill to appreciate the feel of the water on the hand and forearm                                          |
| Set                                                                                         | Refers to repetitions of defined distances and is written on a swimmers workout as ____x____; work-out usually contains two-four different sets.                                                                                | 5x100 yard freestyle Means 4 lengths of freestyle repeated 5 times with either a rest or interval to determine recovery time. |
| Sprinter                                                                                    | A swimmer who competes in events 100 yards or less.                                                                                                                                                                             | 100 yard freestyle, 50 yard freestyle                                                                                         |
| Swim                                                                                        | Performing one of the four competitive strokes                                                                                                                                                                                  | 5x100 free swim Swim freestyle                                                                                                |
| Stroke                                                                                      | Any of the 3 competitive swimming strokes besides Freestyle: Butterfly (fly), Backstroke ( back), Breaststroke (breast)                                                                                                         | 5x 100 Fly Swim butterfly for all 100s                                                                                        |
| Yardage                                                                                     | Total yard or meters accumulated swimming during a set practice time. Verbalized by multiples of 25.                                                                                                                            | A coach may increase daily yardage from 3000 yards to 6000 yards over the course of season. swim the                          |

Italicized notations are what would be recorded in a workout log or record for each swimmer.