Hindawi BioMed Research International Volume 2021, Article ID 5555853, 12 pages https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/5555853

<!-- image -->

## Research Article

## Effect of Integrative Neuromuscular Training for Injury Prevention and Sports Performance of Female Badminton Players

## Wei Zhao , 1,2 Changquan Wang , 1 Yan Bi, 1 and Lianxu Chen 3

1 College of Physical Education and Sports, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China 2 School of Physical Education, Northwest Normal University, Lanzhou, China 3 Institute of Sports Medicine, Beijing Tsinghua Changgung Hospital, Beijing, China

Correspondence should be addressed to Changquan Wang; 529893803@qq.com

Received 10 January 2021; Revised 30 March 2021; Accepted 5 April 2021; Published 26 April 2021

Academic Editor: Tsung-Hsun Hsieh

Copyright © 2021 Wei Zhao et al. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Objectives . Investigate the e /uniFB00 ects of integrated neuromuscular training (INT) on injury prevention and the performance of professional female badminton athletes by comparing their preintervention and postintervention tests. The study hypothesized that integrated neuromuscular training can improve the asymmetry and improve the sport performance of female badminton players. Methods . According to pretest value based on functional movement screening, 38 participants were divided into a highrisk group (HG) and a low-risk group (LG) with 22 and 16 people in each group. Two groups of athletes took part in an 8-week INT program consisting of four 90-min sessions each week. The asymmetries in movement, physical /uniFB01 tness, and special abilities were tested before and after the intervention. Independent sample t -test was used for the statistical analysis. Results . This research found indicated that 8 weeks of INT in /uniFB02 uenced FMS scores in both groups (HG and LG). The change of inline lunge ( ES H = 0 : 42 , ES L = 0 : 21 ) and trunk stability push-up ( ES H = -0 : 58 , ES L = -0 : 20 ) showed signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erences ( P &lt; 0 : 05 ), and the change of the FMS scores ( ES H = 0 : 81 , ES L = 0 : 65 ), deep squat ( ES H = 0 : 6 , ES L = 0 : 3 ), and rotation stability ( ES H = -0 : 65 , E S L = -0 : 72 ) showed very signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erences ( P &lt; 0 : 01 ). Compared to the pretest, most of the physical /uniFB01 tness parameters improved signi /uniFB01 cantly in the HG and LG groups except strength index, and special abilities of the HG and LG group women badminton athletes showed a substantial increase. Conclusion . Integrated neuromuscular training can e /uniFB00 ectively improve the asymmetry of female badminton athletes ' limbs, prevent sports injury, and improve the athlete ' s performance ability. However, athletes in di /uniFB00 erent risk groups have certain di /uniFB00 erences in the degree of improvement in their motor skills.

## 1. Introduction

Integrated neuromuscular training (INT) is a combination of functional movement training and speci /uniFB01 c strength, balance, speed, sensitivity, and isometric training, which aims to evaluate and prevent sports injury and improve sports performance [1, 2]. The separate components of integrative neuromuscular training have been evaluated and recommendations have been made to improve performance in sports activities. The INT approach has been shown to develop an athletes ' sense of proprioception. When not implemented, there is a risk of the training of athlete. Due to in /uniFB02 exibility, uncoordinated movement, and limb di /uniFB00 erences, they have been associated with an increased risk of sports injury (REF). Increase risk of injury can impact skill development and longevity [3, 4]. Studies have shown that INT can e /uniFB00 ectively prevent and improve recovery from sports injury, and an intervention focusing on integrated neuromuscular training can improve the body ' s muscle ligament and joint structure to enhance the comprehensive performance ability of the body [5].

Neuromuscular control defects are mainly manifested as decreases in muscle strength, explosive power, or abnormal activation patterns [6]. Participating in sports training is biased towards conventional sports training methods, which focus on the practice of a single muscle group, single joint, physical /uniFB01 tness, and technical tactics. As we all know, ligaments and muscles have a synergistic e /uniFB00 ect on maintaining the stability of the knee joint [7]. Recent data shows that a complex system sensorimotor synergy may exist around the

anatomy, the structure of the knee, including ligaments, antagonists muscle pairs ( /uniFB02 exors and extensors), bone and sensation ligaments, joint capsules, and related muscles [8].

The main mechanism of how INT reduces the risk of sports injury and improves sports performance is that the human motor sensory system is stimulated by INT, and complex multisensory information is integrated into the central nervous system to achieve motor control [9]. The stability of the joints mainly depends on the ability of the surrounding muscles to be properly activated at any given moment. A highly dynamic process that includes coordinated interaction between all muscles that support the joint. Studies have emphasized that neuromuscular training can be used as a means to manage motion control, improve the motor and sensory systems, improve the dynamic stability of the joints, and reduce the risk of injuries [9]. Fernandez [10] discussed the e /uniFB00 ect of 5-week neuromuscular training on di /uniFB00 erent short-distance sprint speeds and special sensitivity tests of young tennis players. The results found that the neuromuscular training arrangement in training before the tennis training is better than the nerves after the tennis training muscle training group. Does neuromuscular training have the same e /uniFB00 ect in di /uniFB00 erent genders. Trajkovi ć [11] used 8 weeks to test how the neuromuscular training may in /uniFB02 uence the athletic ability and physical performance of female volleyball players aged 10-12. The results found that neuromuscular training during training promotes the athletic performance and physical performance of female volleyball players.

Noncontact anterior cruciate ligament injuries often occur in badminton. The main reasons for knee joint injuries are change of direction or cutting action combined with deceleration, jumping to the ground when close to full extension, and pivoting and standing /uniFB01 rmwhenthe knee is close to full extension [2]. Badminton is the sport with the highest rate of acute injury among the sports, accounting for 1-5 percent of total sports injuries [12]. The technical characteristics of the unilateral handhold also a /uniFB00 ect the imbalanced development of the arms and torso, which is mainly manifested as an imbalance of muscle strength and an asymmetry in the quality of the completion of actions. Besides, any imbalance increases the risk of injuries. Kiesel et al. [13] suggest that fundamental movement patterns and pattern asymmetry are identi /uniFB01 able risk factors for time-loss injury during the preseason in professional football players. Di /uniFB00 erences in the morphological pro /uniFB01 les of young tennis players and how these values can a /uniFB00 ect coordinative abilities have been identi/uniFB01 ed among chronological age categories [14]. Goh et al. [15] and Phomsoupha and La /uniFB00 aye [16] researched causes of injuries occurring at di /uniFB00 erent positions of the shuttlecock and found that incorrect technical movement can lead to injury to the upper limbs and shoulder joint, extremities and trunk kinematic chain, wasted energy transfer, and increased stability of the power loss, increasing the risk of damage. The damage occurs at a rate of 2.9 injuries for each player per 1000 hours playing badminton [17]. Balance is a major factor to prevent injury [18]. Therefore, the development of lower limb asymmetries should be expected and taken into consideration in any prevention strategy in badminton.

Table 1: Functional movement screen results for female badminton players ( N = 38 ).

|             | High-risk group (HG)   | Low-risk group (LG)   |
|-------------|------------------------|-----------------------|
| Number      | 22                     | 16                    |
| Test scores | 10 : 24 ± 1 : 51       | 15 : 15 ± 1 : 41      |

Exercise has become a very important tool to reinjury in the practice of rehabilitation behavior. At present, there have been studies using functional movement screening (FMS) to identify risk problems in sports performance. Shojaedin et al. [19] researched that an approximately 4.7 times greater chance of su /uniFB00 ering a lower extremity injury during a regular competitive season if they score less than 17 on the FMS. Reaching the same conclusion, Chorba et al. [20] study showed that a signi /uniFB01 cant correlation was found between low-scoring athletes and injury ( P = 0 : 0214 , r = 0 : 76 ). The FMS test can predict the risk of injury for athletes without a previous record of sports injuries.

At the same time, other studies have shown that neuromuscular and joint injury risk factors can be improved through integrated neuromuscular training, and there is evidence to support the implementation of INT methods to prevent and treat athletes returning to the /uniFB01 eld after some injuries. The level of basic motor skills lays the foundation for complex body movement and sports training [17]. On the one hand, screening via the FMS can help identify either increased or decreased risk of injury. On the other hand, athletes with excellent athletic performance in competition may perform poorly on the FMS test, re /uniFB02 ecting the fact that these athletes have produced more compensatory movements and energy consumption during training and competition and have not e /uniFB00 ectively mastered the basics. FMS test results are useful in identifying basic movements.

Although INT is very important, a paucity of data exists regarding the relationship between INT and young female badminton players ' functional movements and athletic performance. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine the e /uniFB00 ect of INT on the quality of functional movements and performance of young female badminton players. As far as the author knows, there are few studies on the special training of INT for Female badminton. Therefore, people know little about the e /uniFB00 ects of INT interventions in badminton.

The hypothesis of this research was to integrated neuromuscular training signi /uniFB01 cantly reduces the asymmetry of basic technical movements of badminton players and improves their movement competencies based on FMS.

## 2. Methods

2.1. Participant. Thirty-eight youth female badminton players ( M± SD , age: 17 ± 1 : 1 years; height: 1 : 70 ± 6 : 5 m; body mass: 58 ± 4 : 2 kg) were selected from the TJ Provincial Badminton Team. Players had more than 9 years of professional sports training, had no major injuries within the last two months, maintained a regular diet and schedule of work and rest, did not take any form of nutritional supplements or drugs, and were informed about the purpose and process of

Table 2: Anthropometric characteristics of participants ( N = 38 ).

| Group         | Age        | Height/m        | Body mass/kg   | BMI             | Training years   |
|---------------|------------|-----------------|----------------|-----------------|------------------|
| HG ( N = 22 ) | 17 ± 1 : 8 | 1 : 70 ± 0 : 03 | 58 : 0 ± 2 : 4 | 19 : 23 ± 0 : 5 | 9 ± 1 : 3        |
| LG ( N = 16 ) | 18 ± 1 : 1 | 1 : 72 ± 0 : 04 | 59 : 0 ± 3 : 1 | 19 : 66 ± 0 : 7 | 10 ± 1 : 3       |

Table 3: Integrative neuromuscular training program contents.

| Objective                          | Practice content                                   | Exercise load   | Frequency time   |   Group count |
|------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|---------------|
|                                    | BOSU ball lifts medicine ball on one leg twist     | 2 kg            | 20 s             |             2 |
|                                    | Bosu globular bridge lift                          | Bodyweight      | 30 s             |             2 |
|                                    | Balance board stands on one foot to catch the ball | Tennis          | 30 s             |             2 |
| Balanced and coordination capacity | Balance board stand with eyes closed on one foot   | Bodyweight      | 30 s             |             2 |
|                                    | Swiss ball elbow plank                             | Bodyweight      | 60 s             |             2 |
|                                    | Swiss ball side plank                              | Bodyweight      | 60 s             |             2 |
|                                    | Swiss ball kneel catch                             | Tennis          | 30 s             |             2 |
|                                    | Reverse jump bar                                   | Bodyweight      | 20               |             2 |
|                                    | Drop-jump practice                                 | Bodyweight      | 15               |             2 |
|                                    | Jumping box practice                               | Bodyweight      | 20               |             2 |
| Plyometric training                | Fall standing long jump                            | Bodyweight      | 10               |             2 |
|                                    | Throw the ball with both hands on one side         | 2 kg            | 10               |             3 |
|                                    | Throw the ball forward with both hands             | 2 kg            | 10               |             3 |
|                                    | Turning and throwing medicine ball                 | 2 kg            | 8                |             3 |
|                                    | Hexagon jump                                       | Bodyweight      | 30 s             |             2 |
|                                    | Agility ball exercise                              | Agileball       | 20               |             2 |
| Speed and sensitivity              | Reverse sprint on your back                        | 10m             | 2                |             2 |
|                                    | Illinois agility training                          | Bodyweight      | 2                |             2 |
|                                    | Lie on back heel push                              | Bodyweight      | 20               |             2 |
|                                    | Elastic hip bridge                                 | 30P             | 40 s             |             2 |
|                                    | Lie on your back and twist                         | Bodyweight      | 30 s             |             2 |
|                                    | Overhanging medicine ball to lift knee             | 2 kg            | 15               |             2 |
| Core stability                     | Hip bridge support on one leg                      | Bodyweight      | 30 s             |             2 |
|                                    | Kneel to support the limb on the other side        | Bodyweight      | 20               |             2 |
|                                    | Reverse abdominal curl and knee lift on stool      | Bodyweight      | 20               |             2 |
|                                    | Medicine ball body tilted forward                  | 2 kg            | 10               |             2 |
|                                    | Burpee                                             | Bodyweight      | 15               |             2 |
|                                    | The climbing steps                                 | Bodyweight      | 50 s             |             2 |
| Resistance training                | Jumping jacks                                      | Bodyweight      | 50 s             |             2 |
|                                    | Russian abdominal rotation exercise                |                 | 50 s             |             2 |

the experiment. Each participant read and signed an informed consent from testing approved to ensure the smooth progress of the experiment. All procedures are in accordance with the Helsinki ' s statement.

height, BMI, and training years in addition to the research variables were analyzed using the SPSS software version 21 (Table 2).

2.2. Integrated Neuromuscular Training Testing Procedures. Before the start of the experiment, the subjects were tested by functional movement screen (FMS), and they were divided into a high-risk group (HG) and a low-risk group (LG) according to the FMS test results (Table 1). Data related to the participants ' characteristics including, age, body mass,

Taking into account, the high incidence of sports injuries in badminton, screening via the FMS can help identify either increased or decreased risk of injury. Perform functional movement screen on candidate test subjects before the experiment. Functional movement screen is used as one of the experimental test indicators. After the FMS test, 38 female badminton players were selected to participate in this experimental study.The pretest was performed 1 week before the

Table 4: Arrangement of integrated neuromuscular training content.

|                  | Monday (a.m.)                                                         | Tuesday (a.m.)                   | Thursday (a.m.)                                                       | Friday (a.m.)                             |
|------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Training content | Balanced and coordination capacity Plyometric training core stability | Speed and sensitivity Resistance | Balanced and coordination capacity Plyometric training core stability | Speed and sensitivity Resistance training |
| Training content |                                                                       | training                         |                                                                       |                                           |

Figure 1: Diagram of running with a low center of gravity.

<!-- image -->

training intervention, and the posttest was performed 1 week after the intervention. The experimental group took part in an 8-week INT program consisting of four 90-min sessions each week (Table 3). Players participating in the intervention group needed to maintain their current training regime.

of the movement. The overall FMS scores can range from 0 to 21. Kyle et al. pointed out in the FMS test that professional football players with lower scores on functional action screening are more likely to become injured than players with higher scores.

The INT design used in this study combined the results of previous studies [2, 9, 21 -24] and solicits speci /uniFB01 c opinions and suggestions from coaches and experts. Its content includes balance ability, coordination ability, plyometric training, speed and agility, and core stability training modules. Every Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday morning, INT was performed for 90 min after warm-up activities of approximately 15 minutes each. The di /uniFB00 erent training plates, training contents and training loads are shown in Tables 3 and 4. The rest time of each group was 1-2 min. Three minutes of rest were scheduled between the plates, and each training plate includes 5-7 exercises. The sensitivity training, plyometric training, and resistance exercises had su /uniFB03 cient intervals between the groups to ensure the quality of each group. In addition, on the basis of reducing the risk of athletes ' injury, it pays attention to the stability and /uniFB02 exibility of the joints and the needs of speci /uniFB01 c physical /uniFB01 tness, as well as functional exercises on the nongrip side to improve the athlete ' s balance ability.

## 2.3. Assessments

2.3.1. FMS ™ Test. The FMS [25] is a screening tool comprised of seven speci /uniFB01 c tests to assess an individual ' s overall functional movement capacity. Tests are scored on a 0 -3 ordinal scale and include the squat, hurdle step, forward lunge, shoulder mobility, active straight leg raise (ASLR), push-up, and rotary stability. A score of 3 indicates that the subject was able to perform the movement correctly and without pain. A score of 2 indicates that the subject could complete the movement without pain but with some level of compensation. A score of 1 is given when the subject is unable to complete the movement as instructed. A score of 0 is recorded if the subject experiences pain with any portion

2.3.2. Vertical-Jump Test and Dynamic Balancing Test. In the vertical jump test (Vertical Jump Test, VJ), tester uses the Opto Gait Italian intelligent motion analysis system (Optojump, Microgate, Bolzano, Italy) [26]. The test starts with the setting of the Vertec in which the standing height of the participant with one arm fully extended upward is taken to set the lowest pane. Participants are required to jump up and touch the highest possible pane. Participants were allowed to swing their arms and bend their knees to simulate the real movement in sports, tested 3 times, and take the highest test record score among them. The dynamic balance test uses the single-leg side hop test, and athletes should remain standing on one foot and jump to the opposite side with full on the ground with the other foot. When landing on one foot, they keep their body above 3 s to record e /uniFB00 ective results.

2.3.3. Strength Test. Using Brown, Fleck and Kraemer [27, 28] study the maximum intensity prediction formula:

1RM= ð number of repetitions × 0 : 0338 + 0 : 9849 ⇒ × repetition weight. This index test needs to be measured by squatting. Squatting requires that the thighs are parallel to the ground, the projection point of the knee joint is controlled within the toes, and the torso remains upright.

2.3.4. Sprint Test and Agility Test. The speed test 30 m sprint test (ST) uses a Brower Timing Systems speed tester (Draper, UT, USA) [29]. The subjects used a standing start at the designated starting line and started running on their own when they were ready. The best result was recorded from 2 tests. The accuracy of the test time was 0.01 s. Before the formal test, the participants were required to warm up for 15 minutes, wear a heart rate monitor, and only start the second test when the real-time heart rate recovery was lower than

Table 5: FMS total score and test results ( N = 38 ).

| Test index         | Statistic Group   | Pre              | Post                                   |
|--------------------|-------------------|------------------|----------------------------------------|
|                    | HG ( N = 22 )     | 10 : 67 ± 1 : 80 | 14 : 67 ± 0 : 87 ∗∗ # ES = - 0 : 81    |
| FMS score          | LG ( N = 16 )     | 14 : 33 ± 0 : 50 | 15 : 67 ± 1 : 0 ∗∗ ES = 0 : 65         |
| Deep squat         | HG ( N = 22 )     | 1 : 33 ± 0 : 5   | 2 : 0 ± 0 : 5 ∗ ES = 0 : 60            |
|                    | LG ( N = 16 )     | 2 : 1 ± 0 : 01   | 2 : 33 ± 0 : 5 ES = 0 : 3              |
|                    | HG ( N = 22 )     | 1 : 56 ± 0 : 53  | 2 : 33 ± 0 : 51 ∗∗ :                   |
| Hurdle step        | LG ( N = 16 )     | 2 : 11 ± 0 : 33  | ES = 0 61 2 : 67 ± 0 : 5 ∗ ES = 0 : 55 |
|                    | HG ( N = 22 )     | 1 : 67 ± 0 : 52  | 2 : 01 ± 0 : 01 ES = 0 : 42            |
| Inline lunge       | LG ( N = 16 )     | 2 : 11 ± 0 : 33  | 2 : 01 ± 0 : 01 :                      |
|                    | HG ( N = 22 )     | 1 : 56 ± 0 : 53  | 2 : 1 ± 0 : 01 ∗ - :                   |
| Shoulder mobility  | LG ( N = 16 )     | 2 : 3 ± 0 : 21   | ES = 0 58 2 : 01 ± 1 : 21 ∗ :          |
| Active straight    | HG ( N = 22 )     | 1 : 89 ± 0 : 33  | 2 : 56 ± 0 : 53 ∗∗ - :                 |
| leg raise          | LG ( N = 16 )     | 2 : 11 ± 0 : 34  | 2 : 56 ± 0 : 53 ∗ ES = 0 : 45          |
| Trunk stability    | HG ( N = 22 )     | 1 : 56 ± 0 : 53  | 2 : 1 ± 0 : 01 ∗                       |
| Push-up            | LG ( N = 16 )     | 2 : 0 ± 0 : 01   | ES = - 0 : 58 2 : 1 ± 0 : 34 - :       |
| Rotation stability | HG ( N = 22 )     | 1 : 11 ± 0 : 33  | 1 : 78 ± 0 : 44 ∗∗ ES = - 0 : 65       |
|                    | LG ( N = 16 )     | 2 : 12 ± 0 : 01  | 2 : 86 ± 0 : 5 ∗ ES = - 0 : 72         |

HG: high-risk group; LG: low-risk group; Pre: pretesting; Post: posttesting; ES represents the magnitude of the e /uniFB00 ect compared to Post and Pre; ∗ signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence between pre- and posttest of the two groups, P &lt; 0 : 05 ; ∗∗ signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence between the pre- and posttest of the two groups, p &lt; 0 : 01 . # The signi /uniFB01 cant with-group di /uniFB00 erence, P &lt; 0 : 05 .

100bmp. The Arrowhead Agility Test (AAT) [30] mainly tests the athlete ' s ability to accelerate, decelerate, and change direction while running.

2.3.5. Low Center of Gravity Run [31]. The test was designed to measure both repeated sprint and COD abilities. The

LCGR test consisted of 20 repetitions of a pattern, with each repetition. The basic pattern is de /uniFB01 ned as the following: from the center of the court, the player moves around the 4 corners for repetitions (for a total of 20 movements) in the order of the number 1 (right forecourt), number 2 (left backcourt), number 3 (left forecourt), and number 4 (right backcourt), with a return to the center court number 0. Running to 1 corner and then returning to the center court, running to 2 corner and then running to 3 corner, returning to the center court, running to 4 corner and then running to 1 corner, returning to the center court. The players were instructed to touch each singles sideline with the hand to return the next one immediately (Figure 1). Running to 1 corner and then returning to the center court was considered as 1 movement.

2.3.6. Double Swing Rope Skipping. Using a skipping rope counter, the test team members are required to swing the rope with both hands, jump once, and pass the rope twice under their feet. During the test, if there is an interruption caused by subjective reasons, the watch will not stop until 1500 skips are completed, and the completion time (s) is recorded.

2.3.7. 1 Minute Batting against Wall. The tester stands about 2maway from the wall, holding a low hand position to catch the ball. When the center of gravity moves forward, the nonholding arm raises its natural posture to maintain balance and strikes the ball continuously for 1 minute to the speci /uniFB01 ed hitting area of the wall. If the fault causes the interruption, it is necessary to restart the timing and count the number of hits.

## 3. Statistical Analyses

All data are displayed as the mean and standard deviation and were initially computed as the mean values and SD in Microsoft Excel, and all additional analyses were computed in SPSS21.0. All data were checked for normality using the S-W test. One-way ANOVA was used between the groups, and a paired sample t -test was used to test the results before and after the test. A statistically signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence was de /uniFB01 ned as P &lt; 0 : 05 , and a very signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence was de /uniFB01 ned as P &lt; 0 : 01 . Cohen ' s d value is used to judge the e /uniFB00 ect (e /uniFB00 ect size) of the data measured before and after the group within the group. The e /uniFB00 ect size evaluation standard was divided into a large e /uniFB00 ect ( ES &gt; 0 : 8 ), a medium e /uniFB00 ect ( 0 : 5 &lt; ES &lt; 0 : 8 ), and a small e /uniFB00 ect ( 0 : 2 &lt; ES &lt; 0 : 5 ) [32].

## 4. Results

No injuries or overuse syndromes occurred during testing or training. The attendance rate of the two groups of participants in the training process was 96.8% (high-risk group) and 93.7% (low-risk group) separately, which made the experimental data convincing.

4.1. FMS Test Results. All data were normally distributed ( P &gt; 0 : 05 ), performance of motor functions, as compared with the pretest ( ES = -0 : 81 ), the posttest of the high-risk group (HG) of the FMS total score had a very signi /uniFB01 cant increase ( P &lt; 0 : 01 ). Compared with the pretest ( ES = 0 : 65 ), the posttest of the low-risk group (LG) was signi /uniFB01 cantly

Figure 2: The index change rate before and after training.

<!-- image -->

improved ( P &lt; 0 : 05 ). In the subtest of motor function, the posttest hurdle step score ( ES = 0 : 61 ), active straight knee lifts score ( ES = 0 : 60 ), and rotation stability score ( ES = 0 : 65 ) of the high-risk group compared with the pretest scores had very signi /uniFB01 cant improvements ( P &lt; 0 : 01 ). The deep squat score ( ES = 0 : 60 ), shoulder /uniFB02 exibility score ( ES = -0 : 58 ), and trunk stability push-up score ( ES = -0 : 58 ) were signi /uniFB01 cantly improved compared with the pretest scores ( P &lt; 0 : 05 ). Compared with the previous test, the low-risk group ' s posttest hurdle step score ( ES = 0 : 55 ), shoulder /uniFB02 exibility score ( ES = 0 : 16 ), active straight knee lift score ( ES = 0 : 45 ), and rotation stability score ( ES = -0 : 72 ) showed signi /uniFB01 cant improvements. Except for the signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence in the total FMS score between the high-risk group and the lowrisk group in the posttest ( P &lt; 0 : 05 ), the results of the other subtests did not change signi /uniFB01 cantly (Table 5).

After 8 weeks of INT intervention, there were signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erences in the FMS subindices between the low-risk group and the high-risk group, as well as in the change rates of the two groups before and after the experimental intervention (Figure 2).

There was a signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence in the rate of change of the two parameters of hurdles and trunk stability pushups ( P &lt; 0 : 05 ); the rate of change of the FMS total score, deep squat, and rotation stability showed very signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erences ( P &lt; 0 : 01 ). Also, there was no signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence in the rate of change of the three indexes of the in-line lunge, shoulder /uniFB02 exibility, and active straight leg raise.

4.2. Basic Athletic Ability Test Results. Basic athletic performance, the posttest vertical jump height ( ES = 0 : 51 ), and dynamic balance value ( left ES = 0 : 28 and right ES = 0 : 49 ) of the HG were signi /uniFB01 cantly improved compared with the previous test ( P &lt; 0 : 01 ). There were signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erences in the posttest strength performance value ( ES = 0 : 52 ), speed performance ( ES = 0 : 23 ), and agility test ( ES = 0 : 28 ) of the HG compared with the previous test ( P &lt; 0 : 05 ). There was no signi /uniFB01 cant change in the test results of the other indicators (Table 6).

The comparison between the test results showed that there is a very signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence between the high-risk group and the low-risk group in the sensitivity posttest group

( P &lt; 0 : 01 ), and there were signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence between the dynamic balance ability, strength growth, and speed test performance posttest group ( P &lt; 0 : 05 ), but there was no signi /uniFB01 -cant di /uniFB00 erence between the test groups after the other tests.

4.3. Special Athletic Ability Test Results. In terms of speci /uniFB01 c athletic performance, the high-risk group ' s posttest low center of gravity run ( ES = 0 : 76 ), double swing rope skipping ( ES = 0 : 81 ), and a batting test against a wall ( ES = 0 : 75 ) compared with the pretest showed a signi /uniFB01 cant improvement ( P &lt; 0 : 01 ). The low-risk group ' s posttest low center of gravity run ( ES = 0 : 74 ), double swing rope skipping ( ES = 0 : 76 ), and batting test against a wall ( ES = -0 : 63 ) were signi /uniFB01 cantly different from the pre-test ( P &lt; 0 : 01 ).

The comparison of the results of the special athletic performance test between groups showed that there were very signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erences between the groups in the low center of gravity run and double swing rope skipping ( P &lt; 0 : 01 ), but no signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence between the batting test against a wall (Table 7).

## 5. Discussion

Integrated neuromuscular training (INT) can improve athletes ' motor function, performance, and e /uniFB03 ciency. After 8 weeks of a training intervention in the high and low-risk groups, the scores for vertical jump, balance ability, strength, and batting test against a wall were signi /uniFB01 cantly higher than before the intervention; the values of functional asymmetry, the speed test, and the agility test were signi /uniFB01 cantly decreased, which was consistent with the research hypothesis. The results of this study are consistent with the conclusions of other related studies [21, 23, 24, 28, 33] and Schneiders et al. [34]. Previous research showed that soccer players with an FMS score of fewer than 14 points are 6 times more likely to be injured than other players. Tabatabaei et al. [35] found that compared with conventional training, neuromuscular training improves basketball players ' FMS test scores and lower limb balance. Siberian [22] showed that over 8 weeks of Swiss Ball training intervention, 29 young badminton players underwent FMS tests and lower limb and upper limb balance tests in the 4th and 8th weeks, and

Table 6: Physical /uniFB01 tness test results.

| Index               | HG                | HG                                 | LG                | LG                              |
|---------------------|-------------------|------------------------------------|-------------------|---------------------------------|
|                     | Pre               | Post                               | Pre               | Post                            |
| Vertical jump (cm)  | 33 : 69 ± 3 : 12  | 37 : 21 ± 2 : 83 ∗∗ ES = 0 : 51    | 35 : 76 ± 2 : 28  | 38 : 46 ± 2 : 08 ∗∗ ES = 0 : 53 |
| Dynamic balance (L) | 123 : 56 ± 5 : 57 | 126 : 78 ± 5 : 38 ∗∗ # ES = 0 : 28 | 127 : 33 ± 8 : 46 | 131 : 0 ± 6 : 18 ∗ ES = 0 : 24  |
| Dynamic balance (R) | 124 : 11 ± 5 : 68 | 129 : 11 ± 2 : 87 ∗∗ # ES = 0 : 49 | 127 : 56 ± 6 : 50 | 130 : 89 ± 6 : 07 ∗ ES = 0 : 26 |
| Strength test       | 52 : 11 ± 2 : 80  | 56 : 22 ± 3 : 87 ∗ ES = 0 : 52     | 54 : 56 ± 1 : 04  | 57 : 11 ± 3 : 33 ES = 0 : 46    |
| Sprint test         | 4 : 26 ± 0 : 13   | 4 : 21 ± 0 : 08 ∗ ES = 0 : 23      | 4 : 23 ± 0 : 14   | 4 : 12 ± 0 : 13 ∗ ES = 0 : 38   |
| Agility test        | 17 : 39 ± 0 : 57  | 17 : 04 ± 0 : 63 ∗ ## ES = 0 : 28  | 17 : 07 ± 0 : 62  | 16 : 8 ± 0 : 60 ∗∗ ES = 0 : 21  |

L: left; R: right. ∗ Signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence between the pre- and posttest of the two groups, P &lt; 0 : 05 ; ∗∗ very signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence between pre- and posttest of the two groups, P &lt; 0 : 01 . # The signi /uniFB01 cant with-group di /uniFB00 erence, P &lt; 0 : 05 ; ## very signi /uniFB01 cant with-group di /uniFB00 erence, P &lt; 0 : 01 .

Table 7: Special athletic ability test results.

| Index                            | HG                | HG                                 | LG                 | LG                                  |
|----------------------------------|-------------------|------------------------------------|--------------------|-------------------------------------|
|                                  | Pre               | Post                               | Pre                | Post                                |
| Low center of gravity run (sec)  | 38 : 22 ± 1 : 23  | 35 : 68 ± 0 : 94 ∗∗ ## ES = 0 : 76 | 37 : 02 ± 1 : 40   | 34 : 35 ± 1 : 03 ∗∗ ES = 0 : 74     |
| Double swing rope skipping (sec) | 23 : 02 ± 1 : 84  | 19 : 19 ± 0 : 54 ∗∗ ## ES = 0 : 81 | 21 : 08 ± 1 : 60   | 17 : 65 ± 1 : 30 ∗∗ ES = 0 : 76     |
| Batting test against a wall      | 112 : 89 ± 8 : 36 | 130 : 89 ± 7 : 42 ∗∗ ES = - 0 : 75 | 114 : 11 ± 11 : 24 | 132 : 33 ± 10 : 94 ∗∗ ES = - 0 : 63 |

∗ Signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence between the pre- and posttest of the two groups, P &lt; 0 : 05 ; ∗∗ very signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence between pre- and posttest of the two groups, P &lt; 0 : 01 . # The signi /uniFB01 cant with-group di /uniFB00 erence, P &lt; 0 : 05 ; ## very signi /uniFB01 cant with-group di /uniFB00 erence, P &lt; 0 : 01 .

their performance was signi /uniFB01 cantly improved. Johnson et al. [36] showed that neuromuscular training has a good e /uniFB00 ect on improving the depth perception of the body and enhancing the sense of balance, focusing on strengthening the sacroiliac muscles to improve the athletes ' dynamic balance ability. Combined with the results of previous studies, it has been found that Plyometric Training, core training, balance training, and resistance training in a program integrated neuromuscular training can change athlete ' s movement pro /uniFB01 ciency while reducing the risk of sports injuries.

5.1. The Impact of INT on Sports Injury Prevention. Injury is an inevitable part of the exercise process [37]. The cause of acute injury during exercise has become a focus of attention in sports training and sports human science [38]. Although badminton is not like football, rugby, and basketball, which has a direct physical confrontation, noncontact anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury is also very common. Research indicates that neuromuscular and biomechanical risk factors can be modi /uniFB01 ed by the INT program design [24]. There are gender di /uniFB00 erences in the sensitivity of injury mechanism factors. Epidemiological studies on male and female athletes have found that the incidence of sports injuries in competitions is 2-5 times that in training, and the injury probability of female athletes is approximately 2-8 times higher than that of male athletes [2, 9, 22, 39]. Myer et al. and Van der Sluis et al. [40, 41] have shown that there is a certain correlation between INT reducing the incidence of joint injuries in athletes and age. The focus of training content is di /uniFB00 erent at different ages, adolescence (13-17 years old) is mainly based on musculoskeletal development, without neuromuscular activation and adaptation, which also leads to frequent injuries caused by abnormal joint forces during exercise. Hewett et al. [42] found that neuromuscular training aimed at coordinated control of the body posture can successfully reduce the ACL injury rate by 60%. The left-right imbalance of the shoulder and trunk muscles has become an important factor in the high incidence of injuries after landing from a jump [23]. In training, badminton players should pay attention to strengthening the exercises on the nondominant side and improve the balance ability of badminton players through neuromuscular training, thereby reducing the incidence of sports injuries. Harati and Daneshmandi and Sedaghati et al. [43, 44] showed that core stability training can improve

balance in swimmers helps with e /uniFB00 ective energy transfer and more coordinated actions.

Compared with athletes with better one-sided basic movement ability, excellent athletes have signi /uniFB01 cantly higher completed movement quality and a lower injury incidence [45]. From a physiological point of view, the human body ' s balance ability is the concentrated expression of the human body ' s multisensory integration and movement control. The body mainly receives and inputs information through hearing, vision, and proprioception, information output [39]. The level of proprioception is one of the risk factors a /uniFB00 ecting neuromuscular damage [46]. However, INT combines the comprehensive e /uniFB00 ects of balance training, speed and sensitivity training, plyometric training, and coordination training, which can shorten proprioception and central nervous and motor system reaction times and improve injury resilience and motor performance abilities in athlete [46, 47]. Lu ' s [48] team conducted strength training on the lower limbs of the nondominant side of badminton players and found that these badminton players could reduce their asymmetry between the dominant side and the nondominant side through functional training, which signi /uniFB01 cantly improved the strength and speed.

Movement functional training and auxiliary strength exercises can improve athletes ' movement patterns and physical coordination [49]. Hewett et al. ' s [50] research found that in the experimental group undergoing the INT intervention compared with the control group, the joint stability of female athletes in the experimental group was signi /uniFB01 cantly improved ( P &lt; 0 : 05 ). Similar to the results of this study, the vertical jump performance of the experimental group was signi /uniFB01 cantly improved ( P &lt; 0 : 05 ). The maintenance of joint stability is a /uniFB00 ected not only by a single tissue but also by a coordinated function of bones, joints, ligaments, muscles, tendons, and sensory receptor cortical nerve links [51]. Because female athletes show greater knee valgus angles when doing knee /uniFB02 exion support and exertion [52, 53], INT content-speci /uniFB01 c methods can be used to improve the sensorimotor system, increase neuromuscular control, and improve joint dynamic stability during strenuous exercise. Solomonow and Krogsgaard and Taimela et al. [54, 55] showed that the dynamic stability of joints depends on the multiple in /uniFB02 uences of ligaments, passive inhibition of joint mobility, and active neuromuscular control. A de /uniFB01 cit in muscle strength will cause a response delay through the weakening of the spine ' s sense of position and neurological disorders [56].

5.2. The E /uniFB00 ect of INT on Athlete Performance. The study of Chaouachi et al. [57] has shown that long-term use of a single training method can cause local tension of the muscles and nerves and reduce sensitivity to stimulation. Alternating training methods may help alleviate the overtraining e /uniFB00 ect caused by repeated high-load activities. Previous studies have shown that integrative neuromuscular training has a positive e /uniFB00 ect on balance ability [58 -60], speed capability [10, 61, 62], muscle strength, muscle endurance, and /uniFB02 exibility [63] of the practitioner. Strength, balance, and body coordination contribute to the development of participant ' s motor skills and physical /uniFB01 tness, which is essential for building a health- ier life. Ganeshkumar and Senthilkumar ' s research shows that the integrative neuromuscular training can e /uniFB00 ectively improve the speed ability, leg explosive power, and /uniFB02 exibility ability [64].

According to the concept of training speci /uniFB01 city, a training event that includes targeted athletic ability can improve athletes ' ability better than an event that does not have a speci /uniFB01 c targeted athletic ability [65]. Behm et al. [66] reviewed 18 studies involving balance training and concluded that the balance ability increased by an average of 105% in projects that included balance training goals. Balance ability can also be improved through strength training. The studies of Brooks et al. [67] and Sparkes and Behm [68] improve the ability and speed of proprioceptive muscles through strength exercises to change movement control, thereby improving the speed of the muscles and the ability to resist fatigue. When the limbs move asymmetrically, they will return to a more stable state after INT and improve the ability to jump vertically.

At the same time, Soligard et al. [69] studies have described that the resistance training e /uniFB00 ect of nonstable state and stable state in training has a certain correlation with the training experience of athletes, and the duration of a training intervention will a /uniFB00 ect the adaptability of the training e /uniFB00 ect. The INT program applied in our study aims to prevent the occurrence of sports injuries and neuroadaptability between the target muscles. The experimental results showed that the two groups of athletes have signi /uniFB01 cant improvements in speed, agility, strength, and balance ability, but the actual intervention for the high-risk group had a better e /uniFB00 ect size than of the low-risk group. The results of Bonato et al. [70] on neuromuscular training to improve female nervous system control, stability, and proprioception and reduce the risk of lower back and lower limb injury in athletes showed that the test index of the intervention group was signi /uniFB01 cantly higher than that of the control group, which was consistent with the results of this study. To study the in /uniFB02 uence of neuromuscular training on elite badminton players, Middleton et al. [71] conducted an RPT intervention for 8 weeks, and CMJ (+0.07m), SLJ (+0.13 m), 1-MBT (+2.25m), and 2MBT (+0.26m) were signi /uniFB01 cantly increased, and the levels of CMJ, SLJ, 1-MBT, and 2-MBT were slightly decreased after 16 weeks of follow-up, while the speed was improved, which may be due to the in /uniFB02 uence of nontargeted physical training in the later period.

A study by Myer et al. [21] pointed out that a combination of high-intensity speed and strength training can e /uniFB00 ectively promote athletes ' jumping and balance ability and improve the application e /uniFB03 ciency of key technologies such as directional movement and rhythm control in competitions. Cormie et al. [72] found that after a period of intense strength training, the weight, fat-free mass, and BMI of the athletes remained unchanged. Because highintensity strength training has a higher mechanical stimulation e /uniFB00 ect on the neuromuscular system, it increases the recruitment and emission frequency of the motor units, and after a long period (8 weeks or more) of integrated neuromuscular training, the athlete ' s 1RM strength has been improved by 12-33.2%. Macdonald et al. ' s [73] research

shows di /uniFB00 erent strength training programs will have di /uniFB00 erent results, but studies have con /uniFB01 rmed that INT has a positive e /uniFB00 ect on improving power performance and is more e /uniFB00 ective than a single training method intervention. The increase in fatigue during exercise may be caused by a decrease in the excitability of muscle cell membranes caused by ion interference and excitation-contraction coupling damage [33]. In the research of Macquet and Fleurance [56], there are untimely shots, changes in /uniFB01 eld movements, and incorrect cognition, and the INT mode helps reduce the unstable performance of badminton players in harsh environments.

## 6. Limitations

This study has some limitations. A composite score of ≤ 14 on the FMS is commonly considered the threshold below which an individual is at potential risk of injury. However, the sensitivity of this method is only 24%, which indicates that 76% of athletes ' pain will be ignored during the evaluation process [74]. The interpretation of FMS test results needs more research to verify. The research team was unable to obtain a complete record of the athlete ' s injury, which may be a factor that a /uniFB00 ects the result analysis. This study takes the female badminton players of the TJ Provincial Team as the research object. The small number of experimental objects will limit the application of statistical methods. Secondly, the representativeness of the data of female players in a team remains should be discussed. The impact of the INT method on athletes ' long-term performance and injury prevention is not yet fully understood and needs further research.

## 7. Conclusion

Training methods that a /uniFB00 ect athletes ' training performance and reduce the risk of sports injuries have long been the focus of global sports science. This paper uses integrative neuromuscular training to intervene female badminton players in di /uniFB00 erent injury risk groups. The values of the monitoring indicators have been improved, but the e /uniFB00 ects of the changes are di /uniFB00 erent. Furthermore, it shows that integrative neuromuscular training can improve balance (trunk and extremity), coordination, sensitivity, and exercise capabilities such as leg explosive power and speed capability. INT can help with physical preparation to enhance performance but also help reduce the risk of injuries. Screening tools such as the FMS can further identify de /uniFB01 ciencies and links between INT and injury. This can help athletes maintain a longer competitive state in the international arena. In future research, the training stimulus produced by the minimum amount of training and its interaction with the training intensity which will maintain the athlete ' s exercise ability, which is an interesting content.

## Data Availability

The data involved in the paper has been derived from the original data analysis of the experiment.

## Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare that they have no con /uniFB02 icts of interest.

## Authors ' Contributions

Zhao Wei collected and analyzed the data, as well as wrote and reviewed the /uniFB01 nal version of this manuscript. Wang Changquan and Chen Lianxu collected and analyzed the data, as well as reviewed the /uniFB01 nal version of this manuscript. Bi Yan was responsible for statistical procedures. Wang Changquan and Zhao Wei were responsible for data interpretation and review of this manuscript. AS outlined this study, analyzed the data, and reviewed the /uniFB01 nal version of this manuscript.

## Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Humanities and Social Science Research Planning Fund Project of the Ministry of Education. The grant number is 15YJA890018. The authors would like to thank the coaches and athletes of the TJ Women ' s Badminton Team. They helped us with the training intervention experiments and provided the subjects. Meanwhile, the authors would also like to thank Dr. Xu Jia of Northwest Normal University for her contribution to the guidance of the experimental design and data analysis.

## References

- [1] N. C. Rogasch, T. J. Dartnall, J. Cirillo, M. A. Nordstrom, and J. G. Semmler, ' Corticomotor plasticity and learning of a ballistic thumb training task are diminished in older adults, ' Journal of Applied Physiology , vol. 107, no. 6, pp. 1874 -1883, 2009.
- [2] A. Fort-Vanmeerhaeghe, D. Romero-Rodriguez, R. S. Lloyd, A. Kushner, and G. D. Myer, ' Integrative neuromuscular training in youth athletes. Part II: strategies to prevent injuries and improve performance, ' Strength &amp; Conditioning Journal , vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 9 -27, 2016.
- [3] M. F. Bergeron, M. Mountjoy, N. Armstrong et al., ' International Olympic Committee consensus statement on youth athletic development, ' British Journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 49, no. 13, pp. 843 -851, 2015.
- [4] A. D. Faigenbaum and G. D. Myer, ' Resistance training among young athletes: safety, e /uniFB03 cacy and injury prevention e /uniFB00 ects, ' British Journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 56 -63, 2010.
- [5] M. V. Paterno, J. A. Taylor-Haas, G. D. Myer, and T. E. Hewett, ' Prevention of overuse sports injuries in the young athlete, ' Orthopedic Clinics of North America , vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 553 -564, 2013.
- [6] E. P. Zehr and D. G. Sale, ' Ballistic movement: muscle activation and neuromuscular adaptation, ' Canadian Journal of Applied Physiology , vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 363 -378, 1994.
- [7] F. R. Noyes, S. D. Barber-Westin, S. T. Tutalo Smith, and T. Campbell, ' A training program to improve neuromuscular and performance indices in female high school soccer players, ' Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research , vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 340 -351, 2013.
- [8] J. Orchard, J. Marsden, S. Lord, and D. Garlick, ' Preseason hamstring muscle weakness associated with hamstring muscle

- injury in Australian footballers, ' The American Journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 81 -85, 1997.
- [9] A. Fort-Vanmeerhaeghe, D. Romero-Rodriguez, A. M. Montalvo, A. W. Kiefer, R. S. Lloyd, and G. D. Myer, ' Integrative neuromuscular training and injury prevention in youth athletes. Part I, ' Strength &amp; Conditioning Journal , vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 36 -48, 2016.
- [10] J. Fernandez-Fernandez, U. Granacher, D. Sanz-Rivas, J. M. Sarabia Marín, J. L. Hernandez-Davo, and M. Moya, ' Sequencing e /uniFB00 ects of neuromuscular training on physical /uniFB01 tness in youth elite tennis players, ' The Journal of Strength &amp; Conditioning Research , vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 849 -856, 2018.
- [11] N. Trajkovi ć and Š . Bogataj, ' E /uniFB00 ects of neuromuscular training on motor competence and physical performance in young female volleyball players, ' International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health , vol. 17, no. 5, p. 1755, 2020.
- [12] S. Habelt, C. C. Hasler, K. Steinbrück, and M. Majewski, ' Sport injuries in adolescents, ' Orthopedic Reviews , vol. 3, no. 2, p. 18, 2011.
- [13] K. B. Kiesel, R. J. Butler, and P. J. Plisky, ' Prediction of injury by limited and asymmetrical fundamental movement patterns in American football players, ' Journal of Sport Rehabilitation , vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 88 -94, 2014.
- [14] D. Novak, D. Novak, D. Milanovi ć , and P. Barbaros-Tudor, ' Di /uniFB00 erences among tennis players aged 12, 14 And 16 years in certain morphological characteristics: a croatian prospective, ' Collegium antropologicum , vol. 39, pp. 591 -599, 2015.
- [15] S. L. Goh, A. H. Mokhtar, and M. R. Mohamad Ali, ' Badminton injuries in youth competitive players, ' Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness , vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 65 -70, 2013.
- [16] M. Phomsoupha and G. La /uniFB00 aye, ' The science of badminton: game characteristics, anthropometry, physiology, visual /uniFB01 tness and biomechanics, ' Sports Medicine , vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 473 -495, 2015.
- [17] E. Miyake, M. Yatsunami, J. Kurabayashi et al., ' A prospective epidemiological study of injuries in Japanese national tournament-level badminton players from junior high school to University, ' Asian Journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 7, no. 1, article 29637, p. e29637, 2016.
- [18] R. Sighamoney, R. Kad, and U. L. Yeole, ' E /uniFB00 ect of core strengthening on dynamic balance and agility in badminton players, ' International Journal of Physical Education, Sports and Health , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 86 -88, 2018.
- [19] S. S. Shojaedin, A. Letafatkar, M. Hadadnezhad, and M. R. Dehkhoda, ' Relationship between functional movement screening score and history of injury and identifying the predictive value of the FMS for injury, ' International Journal of Injury Control and Safety Promotion , vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 355 -360, 2014.
- [20] R. S. Chorba, D. J. Chorba, L. E. Bouillon, C. A. Overmyer, and J. A. Landis, ' Use of a functional movement screening tool to determine injury risk in female collegiate athletes, ' North American Journal of Sports Physical Therapy , vol. 5, no. 2, p. 47, 2010.
- [21] G. D. Myer, K. R. Ford, O. P. Palumbo, and T. E. Hewett, ' Neuromuscular training improves performance and lowerextremity biomechanics in female athletes, ' The Journal of Strength &amp; Conditioning Research , vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 51 -60, 2005.
- [22] A. A. Saberian Amirkolaei, R. Balouchy, and R. Sheikhhoseini, ' The e /uniFB00 ect of eight-week Swiss ball training on the integration of functional movements and balance of teenage badminton players, ' Journal of Rehabilitation Sciences &amp; Research , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 153 -159, 2019.
- [23] T. E. Hewett, K. R. Ford, and G. D. Myer, ' Anterior cruciate ligament injuries in female athletes: part 2, a meta-analysis of neuromuscular interventions aimed at injury prevention, ' The American journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 490 -498, 2006.
- [24] G. D. Myer, K. R. Ford, J. L. Brent, and T. E. Hewett, ' The e /uniFB00 ects of plyometric vs. dynamic stabilization and balance training on power, balance, and landing force in female athletes, ' Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research , vol. 20, no. 2, p. 345, 2006.
- [25] V. Bernardes Marques, T. Menezes Medeiros, F. de Souza Stigger, F. Yuzo Nakamura, and B. Manfredini Baroni, ' The functional movement screen (FMSTM) in elite young soccer players between 14 and 20 years: composite score, individual-test scores and asymmetries, ' International Journal of Sports Physical Therapy , vol. 12, no. 6, 2017.
- [26] F. R. Noyes, S. D. Barber, and R. E. Mangine, ' Abnormal lower limb symmetry determined by function hop tests after anterior cruciate ligament rupture, ' American Journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 513 -518, 1991.
- [27] L. E. Brown and J. P. Weir, ' ASEP procedures recommendation 1: accurate assessment of muscular strength, ' Journal of Exercise Physiology Online , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1 -21, 2001.
- [28] S. J. Fleck and W. J. Kraemer, Designing resistance training programs. 2nd ed , HumanKinetics, Champaign, IL, 1997.
- [29] I. T. McFarland, J. J. Dawes, C. L. Elder, and R. Lockie, ' Relationship of two vertical jumping tests to sprint and change of direction speed among male and female collegiate soccer players, ' Sports , vol. 4, no. 1, p. 11, 2016.
- [30] S. Muniroglu and E. Subak, ' A comparison of 5, 10, 30 meters sprint, modi /uniFB01 ed T-test, arrowhead and Illinois agility tests on football referees, ' Journal of Education and Training Studies , vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 70 -76, 2018.
- [31] M. Phomsoupha, Q. Berger, and G. La /uniFB00 aye, ' Multiple repeated sprint ability test for badminton players involving four changes of direction: validity and reliability (part 1), ' Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research , vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 423 -431, 2018.
- [32] J. Cohen, ' A power primer, ' Psychological Bulletin , vol. 112, no. 1, pp. 155 -159, 1992.
- [33] O. Girard and G. P. Millet, ' Neuromuscular fatigue in racquet sports, ' Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics of North America , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 161 -173, 2009.
- [34] A. G. Schneiders, Å. Davidsson, E. Hörman, and S. J. Sullivan, ' Functional movement screen TM normative values in a young, active population, ' International Journal of Sports Physical Therapy , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 75 -82, 2011.
- [35] H. Tabatabaei, S. S. Shojaedin, A. Ahmadi, and M. Hadadnezhad, ' E /uniFB00 ect of six weeks of neuromuscular warm up program on injury incidence and functional movement screen scores in male basketball players disposed to injury, ' Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 192 -200, 2018.
- [36] E. G. Johnson, A. Larsen, H. Ozawa, C. A. Wilson, and K. L. Kennedy, ' The e /uniFB00 ects of Pilates-based exercise on dynamic balance in healthy adults, ' Journal of Bodywork and Movement Therapies , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 238 -242, 2007.

- [37] J. Taylor and S. Taylor, Psychological approaches to sports injury rehabilitation , Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins, 1997.
- [38] J. B. Lauersen, D. M. Bertelsen, and L. B. Andersen, ' The e /uniFB00 ectiveness of exercise interventions to prevent sports injuries: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials, ' British Journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 871 -877, 2014.
- [39] T. Eckard, D. Padua, T. Mauntel et al., ' Association between double-leg squat and single-leg squat performance and injury incidence among incoming NCAA Division I athletes: a prospective cohort study, ' Physical Therapy in Sport , vol. 34, pp. 192 -200, 2018.
- [40] A. Fort-Vanmeerhaeghe, G. Gual, D. Romero-Rodriguez, and V. Unnitha, ' Lower limb neuromuscular asymmetry in volleyball and basketball players, ' Journal of Human Kinetics , vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 135 -143, 2016.
- [41] G. D. Myer, D. Sugimoto, S. Thomas, and T. E. Hewett, ' The in /uniFB02 uence of age on the e /uniFB00 ectiveness of neuromuscular training to reduce anterior cruciate ligament injury in female athletes: a meta-analysis, ' The American Journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 203 -215, 2013.
- [42] A. van der Sluis, M. T. Elferink-Gemser, M. J. Coelho-e-Silva, J. Nijboer, M. Brink, and C. Visscher, ' Sport injuries aligned to peak height velocity in talented pubertal soccer players, ' International Journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 351 -355, 2014.
- [43] D. G. Behm, T. Muehlbauer, A. Kibele, and U. Granacher, ' E /uniFB00 ects of strength training using unstable surfaces on strength, power and balance performance across the lifespan: a systematic review and meta-analysis, ' Sports Medicine , vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 1645 -1669, 2015.
- [44] J. Harati, H. Daneshmandi, and M. R. Shahabi Kaseb, ' Comparing the e /uniFB00 ects of dry-land and in-water core stability training programs on swimmers ' upper body balance and performance, ' Journal of Sport Biomechanics , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 17 -29, 2018.
- [45] P. Sedaghati, P. Sarlak, and F. Saki, ' The role of core stability training in dynamic balance and sport performance of girl child-age range competitive swimmers, ' Journal of Sport Biomot Science , vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 9-10, 2018.
- [46] D. Roberts, E. Ageberg, G. Andersson, and T. Fridén, ' Clinical measurements of proprioception, muscle strength and laxity in relation to function in the ACL-injured knee, ' Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy , vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 9 -16, 2007.
- [47] B. L. Riemann and S. M. Lephart, ' The sensorimotor system, part II: the role of proprioception in motor control and functional joint stability, ' Journal of Athletic Training , vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 80 -84, 2002.
- [48] A. Lu, ' Research on the lower limb joint strength of youth badminton players non-dominant side, ' Journal of Beijing Sport University , vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 131 -138, 2016.
- [49] T. E. Hewett, T. N. Lindenfeld, J. V. Riccobene, and F. R. Noyes, ' The e /uniFB00 ect of neuromuscular training on the incidence of knee injury in female athletes, ' The American Journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 699 -706, 1999.
- [50] T. E. Hewett, A. L. Stroupe, T. A. Nance, and F. R. Noyes, ' Plyometric training in female athletes: decreased impact forces and increased hamstring torques, ' The American Journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 765 -773, 1996.
- [51] D. Docherty and B. Sporer, ' A proposed model for examining the interference phenomenon between concurrent aerobic and
16. strength training, ' Sports Medicine , vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 385 -394, 2000.
- [52] D. G. Lloyd and T. S. Buchanan, ' Strategies of muscular support of varus and valgus isometric loads at the human knee, ' Journal of Biomechanics , vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 1257 -1267, 2001.
- [53] R. A. Malinzak, S. M. Colby, D. T. Kirkendall, B. Yu, and W. E. Garrett, ' Acomparison of knee joint motion patterns between men and women in selected athletic tasks, ' Clinical Biomechanics , vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 438 -445, 2001.
- [54] M. Solomonow and M. Krogsgaard, ' Sensorimotor control of knee stability. A review, ' Scandinavian Journal of Medicine and Science in Sports , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 64 -80, 2001.
- [55] S. Taimela, M. Kankaanpää, and S. Luoto, ' The e /uniFB00 ect of lumbar fatigue on the ability to sense a change in lumbar position: a controlled study, ' Spine , vol. 24, no. 13, pp. 1322 -1327, 1999.
- [56] A. C. Macquet and P. Fleurance, ' Naturalistic decisionmaking in expert badminton players, ' Ergonomics , vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 1433 -1450, 2007.
- [57] A. Chaouachi, A. B. Othman, R. Hammami, E. J. Drinkwater, and D. G. Behm, ' The combination of plyometric and balance training improves sprint and shuttle run performances more often than plyometric-only training with children, ' The Journal of Strength &amp; Conditioning Research , vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 401 -412, 2014.
- [58] A. D. Faigenbaum, A. Farrell, M. Fabiano et al., ' E /uniFB00 ects of integrative neuromuscular training on /uniFB01 tness performance in children, ' Pediatric Exercise Science , vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 573 -584, 2011.
- [59] G. D. Myer, A. D. Faigenbaum, K. R. Ford, T. M. Best, M. F. Bergeron, and T. E. Hewett, ' When to initiate integrative neuromuscular training to reduce sports-related injuries and Enhance Health in youth?, ' Current Sports Medicine Reports , vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 155 -166, 2011.
- [60] G. D. Myer and A. D. Faigenbaum, ' Exercise is sports medicine in youth: integrative neuromuscular training to optimize motor development and reduce risk of sports related injury, ' Revista Kronos , vol. 10, no. 1, 2011.
- [61] A. D. Faigenbaum, J. Kang, N. A. Ratamess et al., ' Acute cardiometabolic responses to multi-modal integrative neuromuscular training in children, ' Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology , vol. 4, no. 2, p. 39, 2019.
- [62] F. Naclerio and A. Faigenbaum, ' Integrative neuromuscular training for youth, ' Revista Kronos , vol. 10, no. 1, 2011.
- [63] W. J. Hurd, T. L. Chmielewski, and L. Snyder-Mackler, ' Perturbation-enhanced neuromuscular training alters muscle activity in female athletes, ' Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 60 -69, 2006.
- [64] T. Ganeshkumar and P. K. Senthilkumar, ' E /uniFB03 cacy of speci /uniFB01 c skill and neuromuscular training on speed and explosive power among badminton players, ' Nutrition and Physical Education , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1455 -1457, 2019.
- [65] L. M. Burke, J. A. Hawley, S. H. S. Wong, and A. E. Jeukendrup, ' Carbohydrates for training and competition, ' Journal of Sports Sciences , vol. 29, no. sup1, sup1, pp. S17 -S27, 2011.
- [66] D. Behm and J. C. Colado, ' The e /uniFB00 ectiveness of resistance training using unstable surfaces and devices for rehabilitation, ' International Journal of Sports Physical Therapy , vol. 7, no. 2, p. 226, 2012.
- [67] C. Brooks, S. Kennedy, and P. W. M. Marshall, ' Speci /uniFB01 c trunk and general exercise elicit similar changes in anticipatory

- postural adjustments in patients with chronic low back pain: a randomized controlled trial, ' Spine , vol. 37, no. 25, pp. E1543 -E1550, 2012.
- [68] R. Sparkes and D. G. Behm, ' Training adaptations associated with an 8-week instability resistance training program with recreationally active individuals, ' The Journal of Strength &amp; Conditioning Research , vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 1931 -1941, 2010.
- [69] T. Soligard, G. Myklebust, K. Ste /uniFB00 en et al., ' Comprehensive warm-up programme to prevent injuries in young female footballers: cluster randomised controlled trial, ' BMJ , vol. 337, no. dec09 2, article a2469, 2008.
- [70] M. Bonato, R. Benis, and A. La Torre, ' Neuromuscular training reduces lower limb injuries in elite female basketball players. A cluster randomized controlled trial, ' Scandinavian Journal of Medicine &amp; Science in Sports , vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1451 -1460, 2018.
- [71] G. Middleton, D. Bishop, C. Smith, and T. Gee, ' E /uniFB00 ectiveness of a low-frequency sports-speci /uniFB01 c resistance and plyometric training programme: the case of an elite junior badminton player, ' International Journal of Coaching Science , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 25 -34, 2016.
- [72] P. Cormie, M. R. Mcguigan, and R. U. Newton, ' Developing maximal neuromuscular power: part 1 -biological basis of maximal power production, ' Sports Medicine , vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 17 -38, 2011.
- [73] C. J. Macdonald, H. S. Lamont, and J. C. Garner, ' A comparison of the e /uniFB00 ects of 6 weeks of traditional resistance training, plyometric training, and complex training on measures of strength and anthropometrics, ' Journal of Strength &amp; Conditioning Research , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 422 -431, 2012.
- [74] A. A. Wright, B. Stern, E. J. Hegedus, D. T. Tarara, J. B. Taylor, and S. L. Dischiavi, ' Potential limitations of the functional movement screen: a clinical commentary, ' British Journal of Sports Medicine , vol. 50, no. 13, pp. 770-771, 2016.