## Research and Analysis of Knee Joint Injury and Rehabilitation in Badminton Athletes Training

## Juan Li

Xianyang Normal University, Shaanxi, Xianyang, 712000, China

544758356@qq.com

Keywords: Badminton, Injury of Knee Joint, Training

Abstract: With the popularization of national sports consciousness and the vigorous development of  badminton,  more  and  more  people  are  taking  part  in  badminton.  With  the  continuous popularization and improvement of badminton, knee joint injury has also become a psychological obstacle that puzzles badminton lovers to develop their technical level. The ability of human body joints to bear load is limited. When an action exceeds the limit that the body can bear, the body will suffer  various  acute  or  chronic  injuries.  With  the  continuous  popularization  and  improvement  of badminton,  knee  joint  injury  has  also  become  a  psychological  obstacle  that  puzzles  badminton lovers to develop their technical level. In badminton, the knee joint injury of athletes' lower limbs not only affects the normal training of the trainers, but also affects the daily work and life of the trainers. In order to provide theoretical basis for badminton fans to prevent and treat sports injuries, this paper analyzes the causes, types and treatment methods of knee joint injuries in badminton.

## 1. Introduction

Badminton has now become a popular sport in our country and is deeply loved by the masses. With  the  continuous  popularization  and  improvement  of  badminton,  knee  joint  injury  has  also become a psychological obstacle to badminton lovers to play their technical level [1]. Badminton is one of the traditional sports in our country, which integrates athletics, fun, fitness and entertainment. It can enhance the functions of human circulation, respiration and other systems, and improve the body's speed, strength, endurance, flexibility, sensitivity, coordination and other qualities. From the perspective of  athletic  footwork,  badminton  players'  lower  limb  movements  on  the  court  include sudden stop, quick rise, return movement, take-off and so on [2]. Most of them involve the basic movements  of  the  lower  limbs.  Therefore,  what  kind  of  reasonable  joint  angle,  speed  and appropriate  relative  position  of  links  to  push  the  ground  will  be  directly  related  to  badminton performance. Badminton belongs to the skill-oriented type of net-separated competitive event group, which has the characteristics of intense antagonism, high intensity of sports and no time limit for competitions [3]. The ability of human body joints to bear load is limited. When an action exceeds the limit that the body can bear, the body will suffer various acute or chronic injuries [4]. If not handled properly, it will limit the fitness ability of the bodybuilder and have a huge impact on the work and life of the bodybuilder.

The sport of badminton is very popular among the general public. According to the survey, we can see that the people engaged in badminton exercise are ranked second in all sports, second only to those who participate in jogging, and the competitive level of the badminton is also It has been greatly improved [5]. Badminton players need to continuously make various complicated technical moves on the court. Although there is no direct physical confrontation by athletes, the complexity, suddenness and continuity of their movements are very strong. With the continuous popularization and improvement of badminton, knee injury has also become a psychological barrier that baffles badminton  enthusiasts  to  play  their technical level.  Badminton  is  a  sport  with  very  high requirements  on  physical  fitness  and  technology.  Badminton  players  need  to  continuously  make various complicated technical moves  on the court. Although there is no direct physical confrontation by athletes, the complexity, suddenness and continuity of their movements are very

strong  [6].  From  the  perspective  of  athletic  footwork,  the  lower  limb  movements  of  badminton players on the court include emergency stop, emergency start, return movement, and jump [7]. In badminton games and training, the change of the ball path has irregularities and the rapid transition between  offense  and  defense.  During  this  process,  participants  often  start  suddenly,  change direction, etc. in an abnormal state [8]. This article starts with the biomechanical knowledge of the knee joint, the technical action of badminton,  and  the mechanism  of  injury, reveals the biomechanical conditions of knee joint injury in badminton, analyzes its principle, and provides a scientific fitness method for preventing knee injuries of badminton bodybuilders.

## 2. Special Characteristics and Damage Characteristics of Badminton

In badminton training and practice, the number of excessive exercises for a certain movement or the time of repeated exercises is too long, which is beyond the range that the body can bear. This will  lead  to  chronic  strain  or  acute  injury  of  joints.  Badminton  is  a  high-intensity  sports  event integrating  human  speed,  strength  and  flexibility.  Speed  quality  is  divided  into  reaction  speed, action speed and displacement speed. The human body is structurally connected by many joints, so the human body can be simplified as a link chain when studying human body movement. When the end of the link chain produces great strength and speed, the movement form of the limb is usually shown as acceleration and braking from the proximal link to the distal link in turn, and the speed of each link is also shown as increasing from the proximal end to the distal end in turn. When the knee is straightened, the lower leg is rotated outward, the tibial tubercle moves outward about half the distance of the patella, and the patella slides on the pulley from inside to outside, so that the axis of the patella and the patellar tendon are in a straight line. The extension, flexion and rotation of the knee are well coordinated with the movement of the patella. Footwork occupies the core position in badminton technical movements, and it is also the starting movement of most technical movements of  badminton.  Flexible  mastery  of  badminton  footwork  can  enable  badminton  players  to  quickly change positions to move to the best position to finish hitting the ball and return to the preparation position or move to the next position to prepare opponents to return to the ball.

In badminton training and competition, participants often make repeated moves such as forward, backward, pedal, etc. within a short distance, and the knee joint bears a large load. The quality of footwork  in  the  front  court  directly  determines  the  competition  results  to  a  great  extent.  The frequency of footwork used by badminton team members in the competition was summarized. As shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Frequency of footwork used by players in the competition

| Name of footwork   |   Male |   Female |
|--------------------|--------|----------|
| Step by step       |   1024 |      612 |
| Step forward       |    497 |      314 |
| Cross step         |    384 |      269 |

If the fast ball is played quickly, the physical strength will be greatly consumed. According to the  characteristics  of  badminton,  medial  collateral  ligament  of  knee  joint  is  more  easily  injured, followed by sprain of anterior cruciate ligament of knee joint. Table 2 shows the characteristics of elbow angle changes in the two stages when the subject hits the drop ball and kills the ball.

Table 2 Variation characteristics of elbow joint angles in two stages during hanging and killing

| Defeat type   | First stage   | Second stage   |
|---------------|---------------|----------------|
| Drop shot     | 20.24±2.21    | 26.24±1.97     |
| Smash         | 36.81±3.32    | 40.26±2.69     |

It  takes  a  certain  time  for  athletes  to  recover  from  knee  injuries.  If  they  are  trained  too  early, acute  injuries  can  turn  into  chronic  injuries,  so  the  timing  of  training  should  be  grasped.  The displacement speed of badminton players can be said to be the sum of the individual movement

speed  and  movement  conversion  speed.  Badminton  players  need  not  only  considerable  muscle strength  and  very  good  fast  strength,  but  also  very  good  endurance.  Judging  from  the  form  of muscle contraction, badminton players need not only good isometric contraction ability, but also good isometric and eccentric contraction ability. When the knee joint is a very complicated joint, it is a heavy large joint composed of the distal end of femur, proximal end of tibia and patella. The femur  and  tibia  are  connected  and  reinforced  by  cruciate  ligament,  the  periphery  of  the  joint  is surrounded by joint capsule, and two collateral ligaments are on both sides of the joint capsule [9]. When the load exceeds the limit it can bear, it will cause acute or chronic injury to the knee joint. From the point of view of sports mechanics, for the foot flexion movement that rapidly pushes off the ground, the joint that finally occurs must be the metatarsophalangeal joint. In badminton, it also requires  a  kind  of  sensitive  quality  of  improvisation,  that  is,  it  must  be  judged  quickly  and accurately  with  the  changes  of  the  situation  on  the  court  under  the  constantly  changing  external conditions, and complete all kinds of actions promptly and decisively.

## 3. Analysis of Knee Joint Injury Mechanism Based on the Characteristics of Badminton Events

## 3.1. Master the Correct Technical Actions

Badminton  is  a  highly  skilled  sport.  Incorrect  technical  movements  cause  knee  joint  injury training and technical movements in competitions to change quickly, change directions more and have  more  strain.  If  athletes  do  not  protect  themselves,  they  will  be  easily  injured.  Footwork occupies the core position in badminton technical movements, and it is also the starting movement of  most  technical  movements of badminton. Flexible mastery of badminton footwork can enable badminton players to quickly change positions to move to the best position to finish hitting the ball and return to the preparation position or move to the next position to prepare opponents to return to the ball. Badminton movement consistency means that the technical movements before hitting the ball are basically consistent, but in different hitting techniques, the striking point, timing, striking surface and outgoing ball show slight differences in strength, speed and direction at the moment before  hitting  the  ball.  The  consistency  of  actions  is  based  on  the  integrity  of  actions.  From  the point of view of sports mechanics, for the foot flexion movement that rapidly pushes off the ground, the joint that finally occurs must be the metatarsophalangeal joint. Its flexion and extension features can  have  an  important  impact  on  the  running  and  jumping  movements  of  the  human  body, especially on the stare-off effect at the later stage of support. In order to increase the efficiency of badminton players' footwork, badminton shoes are constantly updated on the basis of defining the characteristics of badminton footwork, so as to achieve the effects of increasing wearing comfort, improving footwork movement performance and protecting feet, thus preventing injuries.

## 3.2. Creating a Good Sports Environment

The human body is structurally connected by many joints, so the human body can be simplified as  a  link  chain  when  studying  human body movement. When the end of the link chain produces great  strength  and  speed,  the  movement  form  of  the  limb  is  usually  shown  as  acceleration  and braking from the proximal link to the distal link in turn, and the speed of each link is also shown as increasing from the proximal end to the distal end in turn. Lack of or insufficient preparation before exercise, poor physical condition, lack of training to adapt to the environment, and too long time in the  exercise  are  the  primary  causes  of  knee  exercise  injuries  [10].  Badminton  movement consistency means that the technical movements before hitting the ball are basically consistent, but in  different  hitting  techniques,  the striking  point,  timing,  striking  surface  and  outgoing  ball  show slight differences in strength, speed and direction at the moment before hitting the ball. Acute sports injuries are more frequent than chronic sports injuries. The causes of improper treatment of acute injuries, untimely or early participation in training can be converted into chronic injuries, strain, reinjury  or  relaxation  of  tendon  and  ligament.  [11]  As  long  as  the  movements  are  complete,  the differences  between  the  movements  will  be  reduced  and  the  techniques  of  various  technical

movements will be close to the same. In fact, the higher the level in the competition, the chance in attack is often created by the confrontation of balls in the middle section. If the fast ball is played quickly, the physical strength will be greatly consumed.

## 4. Conclusions

Knee joint  injury  is  one  of  the  common  injuries  in  badminton.  There  are  many  researches  at home and abroad, and the importance of knee joint injury is getting higher and higher. Incorrect badminton movement techniques, excessive sports and incorrect sports hygiene habits can all cause different  degrees  of  injuries.  In  sports  training,  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  arrangement  of content and load according to physical characteristics, training level and training period. Ideological education for athletes should also be strengthened to establish a correct outlook on life and world outlook. Before training or exercise, the knee joint should be well prepared, and vigorous energy should be maintained during exercise. When physical strength decreases and body fatigue occurs, great  exercise  should  be  avoided  as  much  as  possible  to  prevent  injury.  Improving  the  ability  of knee  joint  becomes  an  indispensable  part  of  badminton.  At  the  same  time,  to  master  the  correct technology of badminton and do a good job of special preparation is a problem worthy of attention in this mass sports activity. On the basis of not affecting the action sensitivity, properly increase the anti twist performance of the forefoot of the badminton shoes, reduce the turnover of the forefoot, so as to reduce the load moving to the inside. Before training or exercise, the knee joint should be well  prepared  for  exercise.  During  exercise,  keep  vigorous  energy.  When  the  physical  strength drops and the body is tired, try to avoid large exercise to prevent injury.

## References

- [1] Guo W.C. (2017). Research on the sports injuries and causes of badminton students. Sports, no. 15, pp. 60-61.
- [2] Wang C, Ma S, Wang L. (2019). Research on the risk of badminton sports injury based on the strength of hip extensor and abductor muscles. Bulletin of Sports Science and Technology, no. 12, pp. 23-24.
- [3] Duan Li.H., Zhang P., Wang X.W., (2015). One case of diffuse tenosynovial giant cell tumor of the knee. Journal of Hubei Medical College, no. 3, pp.  306-307.
- [4] Liu S.Z., Hu Z.G., Zhang J, (2015). Inverse dynamics simulation of the athlete's lower extremity dynamic response under impact load. Medical Biomechanics, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 30-37.
- [5] Wang, M.B. (2015). The important role of core strength training in badminton training. Journal of Chifeng University: Natural Edition, no. 21, pp. 161-162.
- [6] Li J.P. (2016). Footwork training in badminton training. Industry and Technology Forum, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 160-161.
- [7] Wang Y. (2015). The important role of core strength training in badminton training. Science and Technology Innovation, no. 29, pp. 161-162.
- [8]  Li  C.  (2015).Research  on  Badminton  Multi-ball  Training  for  Improving  Physical  Function. Science and Technology Innovation, no. 15, pp. 92-94.
- [9] Liu P. (2015). A preliminary study on footwork training skills in college badminton teaching. Youth Sports, no. 6, pp. 107-108.
- [10]  Liu  H.  (2018).  Application  of  multi-ball  training  method  in  amateur  badminton  training  for young children. Chinese Teenagers, no. 29, pp.  165-165.
- [11] Wu H.Y. (2016). Research on the physical characteristics and training methods of badminton. Stationery and Sport Supplies and Technology, no. 24, pp. 193-194.